[10]
The Board's decision under review is dated May 3, 2005, and was communicated to the applicant by letter dated August 10, 2005. It held at pages 11 to 15 that:
"1. the Veterans Affairs Canada Entitlement Eligibility Guidelines for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder indicate that the individual must have been exposed to a traumatic event which involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or threat to the physical integrity to the applicant or others so that the individual's response involved intense fear, helplessness or horror;
"2. the Board is required under s. 35(2) of the
Pension Act
to assess the disability based on these Guidelines;
"3. the Board found that the applicant's military activity did not involve such a traumatic event;
"4. these Guidelines adopt the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, IV Edition (DSM-IV), which has defined PTSD as a psychiatric condition if it meets six criteria. The first of which is set out as follows:
'A. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which:
i. The person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or events that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others; and
ii. The person's response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror; [...]'
"5. the Board found that the Psychologist's opinion does not accord with the definition of PTSD and is therefore not credible as the basis for the pension award;
"6. the Board found that the applicants are to be given the benefit of the doubt in the weighing of evidence in accordance with ss. 3 and 39 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
. However, the benefit of the doubt does not lead the Board to accept automatically whatever submission is made by the veteran. The evidence must be credible and it must be reasonable. The Board implicitly found that the applicant had not established a reasonable doubt;
"7. the Board also found PTSD is a condition which emerges from military combat, and to a lesser degree, personal violence and serious physical injuries in civilian life. PTSD cannot be extended to cover the circumstances of the applicant's case which is to accept that non-violent administrative activities caused PTSD;
"8. finally, if the diagnosis of PTSD is correct, then it would have to be based on evidence that would include the complete history of the applicant's life so that the Board could assess whether or not it was related or aggravated by military service; and
"9. since the Board did not accept the diagnosis of PTSD as claimed by the applicant, the Board made no finding as to whether the alleged disability arose out of or was directly connected to his military service."
Relevant Legislation