[11]
In the affidavit which followed the CAIPS notes, the visa officer expands upon her reasoning in the following manner:
4. In assessing the applicant's education, I did not consider his diploma at the Marine Engineering College, Calcutta, certified by Directorate of Marine Engineering Training, to be the bachelor's degree requisite for marine engineers. He did not submit a diploma designating that he held a Bachelors degree in Engineering. In addition, I also considered that a portion of his training for the diploma between 1973 and 1976 was a practical apprenticeship at the Calcutta Port Authority, where he received training in: machine shop, pattern shop, electrical workshop, blacksmith shop, boiler shop, diesel shop, fitting shop, marine repairs (on board). The information submitted states he received the practical training (excluding the period he attended Theoretical Classes in Marine Engineering College). I considered, in the absence of documentation to the contrary, that the subject held a college diploma equivalent and not a bachelors degree.
5. In assessing the applicant's application under N.O.C. 2148 (other professional engineers of the National Occupational Classification (the "NOC"), I considered the actual duties that the applicant claimed to have performed. I did not consider that they amounted to one year of full-time experience as follows:
"Marine and naval engineers design and develop marine vessels and floating structures, and associated marine power plants, propulsion systems and related systems and equipment and oversee the building, maintenance and repair of vessels and marine systems."
. . . . .
7. In assessing the applicant's application under N.O.C. 7216 (foreman of air conditioning / refrigeration mechanics) of NOC, I went beyond the titles that the applicant worked under over the years and focused [sic] on the actual duties, which the applicant claimed to have performed. Thus, I took note of the fact that his duties as a ship surveyor, for instance, did not encompass at least some of the main duties listed in N.O.C. 7216. This is true even after the applicant's ship surveyor duties had been broken down into their constituent elements. [...]
. . . . .
11. The real context of the applicant's onboard engineering experience, in fact, is that of an engineer officer - water transport - which is clearly spelled out under another NOC code and involves the
operation
and maintenance of all ships systems, including engines etc.
12. Similar concerns arise in respect of the context of the applicant's surveying and in-charge experience with his latest employer, which centres around inspecting / surveying as an independent third party for the purposes of surveys / audits / classification.
. . . . .
14. I note that the Applicant in his argument is attempting to expand or replace the actual occupation in which he asked to be assessed- that of Foreperson air conditioning and refrigeration mechanics,- not supervisor mechanic trades which could include another type of mechanic- i.e. FOREMAN, Marine service-engine repair. The Applicant only asked to be assessed in the Foreperson air conditioning and refrigeration mechanics occupation of the N.O.C. 7216 occupation description and not any other occupation listed in the description.
. . . . .
16. The Applicant asserts that he had some' relevant experience' in the other occupations listed in N.O.C. 7216.0. However, experience in one occupation does not mean a person is experienced in another occupation even granting that there may be some overlap. My duty was to assess whether the Applicant had performed some of the main duties of the occupation he selected as they are described in the N.O.C. description.