[13]
In Bonilla v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2001), 12 Imm. L.R. (3d) 83 at paragraph 29 (F.C.T.D.) O'Keefe J. considered that the letter to the applicant and the officer's notes comprised the visa officer's reasons for her decision and those documents met the requirements to provide reasons. The Court in Tajgardoon v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (T.D.), [2001] 1 F.C. 591 at 602-04 stated that:
Furthermore, if draft reasons are not part of the record, it is unlikely that CAIPS notes are part of the record either. They are not part of the body of information before the visa officer when he/she makes his/her decision in the same sense as the applicant's record of education or employment is. The CAIPS notes are an internally generated document and are not a document put before the visa officer by the parties. As Reed J. pointed out in Chou, supra,
the CAIPS notes are more in the nature of reasons for the decision, notwithstanding the fact that in visa cases, the applicant will have received a letter containing the reasons for the refusal of his/her application
.
But to say that the CAIPS notes are reasons does not dispose of the question of admissibility. There is no general principle that reasons are admissible by their production. Admissibility is always a question of "For what purpose?" In the hands of the applicant, the contents of the CAIPS notes tend to be used to show that the visa officer has misconducted himself in some fashion. In the hands of the respondent, the same notes are used to bolster the respondent's submission that all relevant factors were considered. [...] whose author is not available for cross-examination. The conclusion flowing from a traditional analysis of the law is that the CAIPS notes would be admissible at the instance of the applicant as admissions against interest but would not be admissible in the hands of the respondent because they are self-serving hearsay statements.
. . . . .
However, the respondent is not in a position to rely on the CAIPS notes as proof of their contents because this is classic hearsay. They are not admissible as business records in the absence of evidence [page604] which establishes that they satisfy the requirements of admissibility of business records. In order to make the CAIPS notes evidence of the facts to which they refer, they must be adopted as the evidence of the visa officer in an affidavit. (My emphasis)