[13]
In terms of compensation, the 1995 Services Agreement provided in clause 3 for the following:
"(a)
Base Compensation
. During the first year of the Term, the Company shall pay Executive an aggregate base compensation of U.S. $360,000 payable in equal monthly instalments of U.S. $30,000, inclusive of any Goods and Services Tax ('GST'). For each annual period after the first year of the date of this Agreement, the Base Compensation shall be adjusted by the Compensation Committee of the Board by an amount as the Company and the Executive may agree upon.
"(b)
Bonuses
. During the Initial Term, Executive will be eligible to receive a cash bonus ('Bonus') in accordance with, and for each period (each, a 'Payment Year') specified in the Corporate Management incentive Plan (the 'Plan'). The payment of a Bonus for each Payment Year during the Initial Term shall be conditioned upon the Company meeting or exceeding the financial results criteria (the 'Targets') as determined by the Board or the Compensation Committee for its senior executives.
"(c)
Stock Options
. Upon execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Company and Executive, Executive shall receive an option to purchase 500,000 shares of Common Stock of the Company. The purchase price for the shares of Common Stock subject to such option shall be U.S. $4.125 per share, or such other price as may be agreed upon in writing by the Company and the Executive. The Executive's options may be transferable to a family trust and are exercisable at any time during the term.
"(d) As a result of an understanding reached between the Company and the Executive in October, 1993 and in consideration of the Executive agreeing not to receive any compensation during the fiscal year ended September 30, 1994, the Company agrees that upon execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Company and Executive, the Executive shall receive as a bonus 75,000 shares of Common Stock duly registered in the name of the Executive or as the Executive directs at a deemed price of Cdn. $2.25.
"(e) At any time during twelve months from the date of this agreement, the Executive may acquire an additional up to 75,000 shares of Common Stock at a price of U.S. $3.25 per share along with share purchase warrants entitling the Executive to purchase up to a further 75,000 shares of Common Stock at a price of U.S. $3.75 until March 31, 1995 and U.S. $4 at any time after March 31, 1995 and up to September 30, 1996."
(2) The Credit Agreements