[11]
The decision of the Veterans Review and Appeal Board at the entitlement appeal level, dated June 9, 1997, confirming the Review decision, reads, in part:
. . . . .
"This Board, based on the evidence before it, is unable to conclude that the claimed condition of cervical disc disease is attributable to or was incurred during Mr. Hall's relatively short, one year Reserve Force service. This Board is satisfied that the Entitlement Board decision is appropriate and can find no basis to disturb it.
"While this Board is sympathetic to Mr. Hall's situation, it is unable to conclude that the condition or any aggravation thereof is pensionable.
"The evidence before this Board indicates that Mr. Hall's recorded condition of 'cervical disc disease' was indeed diagnosed by a doctor of chiropractic, Dr. Pietrangelo on 11 January 1996 as 'chronic cervical strain resulting in mechanical neck pain from joint dysfunction and associated muscle spasm' and by Dr. Lovell on 20 December as 'mild arthritis to the cervical spine probably as a result of his neck injury in 1984'.
"When Mr. Hall appeared before his Entitlement Review Board in Windsor, Ontario on 22 January 1987 [sic] he indicated that when he was released from militia service, he filed a medical statement regarding his neck injury. As noted also by that Board, this medical statement could not be found in any of Mr. Hall's release documents. [sic: the medical statement was among the release documents; a medical examination consequent on declaration of an injury was not].
"
Also obvious to this board is that the diagnosis, referred to earlier in this decision, is not supported by any x-rays
.
"This Board is faced with no evidence to support an award of pension. There is no indication of any symptoms or complaints during Mr. Hall's Reserve Force service and there is no reports of injury documented during this same period of time.
"
As for the contention by the Advocate that the evidence presented before the Entitlement Review Board raised a reasonable doubt that the claimed condition is related to an injury sustained in the course of Mr. Hatt's Reserve Force service, this Board is of the opinion that in the absence of any supporting medical evidence on the record, it finds that the medical opinion found on the file simply raises a possibility. It is the opinion of this Board that these medical evaluations are simply speculation which, regrettably, is not sufficient under the circumstances to create a doubt in the mind of this Board that the claimed condition of cervical disc disease is related to an incident in 1983-1984
." (underlining added)