[17]
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
, S.C. 1995, c. 18 as amended:
"3. The provisions of the Act and of any other Act of Parliament or of any regulations made under this or any other Act of Parliament conferring or imposing jurisdiction, powers, duties or functions on the Board shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their county so well and to their dependants may be fulfilled.
"32(1) Notwithstanding s. 31, an appeal panel may, on its own motion, reconsider a decision made by it under s. 29(1) or this section and may either confirm the decision or amend or rescind the decision if it determines that an error was made with respect to any finding of fact or the interpretation of any law, or may do so on application if the person making the application alleges that an error was made with respect to any finding of fact or the interpretation of any law or if new evidence is presented to the appeal panel.
"39. In all proceedings under this Act, the Board shall
(a) draw from all the circumstances of the case and all the evidence presented to it every reasonable inference in favour of the applicant or appellant;
(b) accept any uncontradicted evidence presented to it by the applicant or appellant that it considers to be credible in the circumstances; and
(c) resolve in favour of the applicant or appellant any doubt, in the weighing of evidence, as to whether the applicant or appellant has established a case."
Pension Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6:
"2. The provisions of this Act shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to provide compensation to those members of the forces who have been disabled or have died as a result of military service, and to their dependants, may be fulfilled.
"21(2) In respect of military service rendered in the nonpermanent active militia or in the reserve army during World War II and in respect of military service in peace time,
(a) where a member of the forces suffers a disability resulting from an injury or an aggravation thereof that arose out of or was directly connected with such service, a pension shall, on application, be awarded to or in respect of the member in accordance with the rates for basic and additional pension set out in Schedule I."
Analysis