 [4] 
  The applicant states in her Personal Information Form (PIF) that during their time together, she was subjected to significant abuse at the hands of her partner. These incidents include: 
 
 
 
 1) in November 2004, after visiting her mother, the applicant was threatened and verbally abused for having spoken with her mother's male neighbour. The applicant states that after they returned home, her partner physically abused her for the first time. Later that evening, after her partner left for a meeting, the applicant fled the home, reported the incident to an officer on duty at the Public Ministry, and travelled by bus to Tlaxcala where she stayed with a friend. The applicant states that her partner arrived at her friend's home about one month later, and that she accepted his apology and returned with him in order to "rebuild" their relationship; 
 
 
 
 2) in January 2005 the applicant states that she was beaten and raped by her partner and his friend when she refused to take her clothes off at a party. The applicant states that she was held hostage for the next 15 days. When she managed to escape, she fled to Tuxtla Gutierrez, about three hours away by airplane, where she stayed with another friend. Once arriving in Tuxtla Gutierrez, the applicant tried to file a complaint at the Public Ministry, but was told that she could only make the complaint in Pachuca, where the assault occurred; 
 
 
 
 3) in February 2005, the applicant's partner tracked her down in Tuxtla Gutierrez and forced her to return with him to Pachuca; 
 
 
 
 4) in March 2005, the applicant discovered that she had become pregnant as a result of the January 2005 rape. When she told her partner about this, he beat her to such a degree that she suffered a miscarriage. Two days after being released from the hospital, the applicant went to stay at the home of her uncle, during which time she saw a psychologist on five occasions; and 
 
 
 
 5) in May 2005, after the applicant returned to her mother's home in Pachuca, her partner confronted her, pushed her mother aside, and slapped the applicant in the face.