[21]
On the subject of voluntariness of tax payments, Pannam says at pp. 785 and following:
(1) Each case will depend on its own facts.
(2) As a general proposition, a voluntary payment is not necessarily one the payer wishes to make.
(3) Payment will be voluntary if it can only be enforced through judicial proceedings in which the validity of the tax can be put in issue.
(4) Involuntariness requires some actual or threatened exercise of power for which the payer has no means of immediate relief other than by making payment.
(5) Involuntariness of payment is associated with extrajudicial sanctions such as seizure of property, duress of the person, or denial of the right to continue in business (these were factors that were found to be present in
Premier Mouton
).
(6) The existence of extrajudicial sanctions of themselves is insufficient to make payment of tax involuntary in the absence of an intent by a governmental authority to implement such sanctions.
(Pannam states at pp. 785 to 788:
"It is apparent from the very nature of the subject that each case must depend on its own peculiar facts. However, there are a few general propositions that may be stated with some confidence. The first is that the expression 'voluntary payment' does not necessarily mean a payment which the payer wishes to make. As one Australian judge has put it, 'In the case of many persons their payments never are voluntary in that sense!' A payment is clearly voluntary, even though the payer wishes that he did not have to make it, if it is made with free exercise of the will to get rid of some liability. What is critical is whether there was a choice between paying and not paying. Or to put it in the negative, before a payment will be regarded as involuntary, there must be some actual or threatened exercise of power, possessed by the party receiving it, over the person or property of the payer, for which the latter has no other means of immediate relief than by making the payment.
. . . . .
"It seems reasonably well settled in both Australia and the United States that payment of taxes will always be considered voluntary if such payment can only be enforced by judicial proceedings in which the validity of the tax, or the constitutionality of the taxing act, can be put in issue. If, however, nonpayment will be attended with extrajudicial sanctions such as seizure of property, duress of the person, denial of the right either to commence or continue a business, and so on, then the character of the payment changes. At one time it was thought that this was so only if there was an actual and immediate probability that these sanctions would be resorted to. More recently, however, this requirement has been relaxed ... It does not seem, however, that the mere existence of extrajudicial sanctions in a tax act without evidence that the authorities intend to implement them makes a payment compulsory.
"The fact that taxes are demanded by, and paid to, governmental officials vested with wide enforcement powers might seem in itself to constitute compulsion. The citizen and the official who is cloaked with the authority of the state are just not on an equal footing. On this basis it could be argued either that payments made to governmental officials can never be voluntary or, alternatively, that a good deal less evidence is needed to prove compulsion by them than by a private person. The first argument has never been regarded as good law ... The second argument in that it suggests that there are different criteria to test the voluntary nature of payments made to government officials and to private persons does not have much foundation in authority. But in that it suggests that the same criteria might produce different results depending upon whether a private person or a government official is involved, it has been accepted. The government official has far wider powers of compulsion at his disposal, and this factor is a significant one in any inquiry concerning the voluntary nature of a particular payment. There is no doubt, however, that a payment made to such an official can be voluntary. The fact that he is an official and that he may have certain powers at his command are only considerations to be taken into account with the other facts of the case.
"Beyond these general propositions, the law on voluntary payments descends into the minutiae of particular situations and the compulsions alleged to exist in them. These propositions do state, however, the rules that the Australian and United States courts have used to deal with problems concerning the recovery of unconstitutional taxes. They are not very generous rules as far as the taxpayer is concerned." (footnotes omitted)