[17]
Sixteen witnesses testified at the hearing, seven on behalf of the applicant, then the complainant, and nine on behalf of the employer, the Bank of Canada. Reading the adjudicator's decision, I note that she provided a comprehensive description of the testimony and, after weighing it up, concluded as follows:
[Translation]
"It is clear to me here
that this is an administrative dismissal and not a disciplinary dismissal. Although Parliament makes no distinction between them, an adjudicator will nonetheless approach a case of administrative dismissal in a way that differs from that of a disciplinary dismissal. I subscribe to the remarks of the arbitrator Mr. Charles Turmel in the decision tabled by the employer.
Services Techniques Informatiques S.T.I. Inc. et Bernard Tessier
, [1991] T.A. 188, when he writes
:
[Translation] 'After examining the whole of the record, I reach the following conclusions:
'
1. The griever's dismissal is an administrative dismissal. The major reasons cited by the employer are based on the notions of attitude and performance
. In no case does the record disclose any disciplinary measure taken by S.T.I. against the griever.
'
Consequently, the employer is not subject to the rules of the culminating incident and the gradation of punishments. In an administrative dismissal, the burden of proving just and sufficient cause for dismissal always rests on the employer. It must always, by a preponderance of evidence, convince the arbitrator that it had just and sufficient cause. However, the cases hold that in such instances the arbitrator must not substitute his judgment for that of the employer and shall intervene only if he reaches the conclusion that the employer acted in an unreasonable, unfair or discriminatory way.
(Pages 195 and 196) ...
'4. As I see it, therefore, my assessment of the evidence must be limited to verifying whether the employer, in citing the griever's attitude and performance as just and sufficient cause for his dismissal, thereby acted in an unreasonable, unfair or discriminatory way.' (Page 196)
"Essentially, the dismissal is justified by the content of the evaluation conducted by Mr. Lynch for the year 1994-1995 (P-3) and the outcome of the meeting between Mr. Aiken and Mr. Gauthier.
"
I am of the opinion that the record did in fact show that Mr. Gauthier's presence in the Bank of Canada was no longer desirable. He was having some problems with a number of his employees, with Mr. Murphy, with Mr. Richard and with the management.
"As a backdrop, I have the feeling that the complainant had a vision of the security system that many people did not share. This vision created confrontations at all levels. When I review
the daily notes made by Mr. Lynch (P-5) and by Mr. Gauthier (S-17), they are strewn with conflicts on a host of topics
.
"Mr. Gauthier demanded that his officers be given further training, that Mr. Murphy wear a uniform and a carry a weapon, that any security matter be under his supervision, that management support him in his way of seeing things. In themselves, all these demands were addressed to the Bank's interest and perhaps Mr. Gauthier was right.
However, I must note that the complainant's insistence and his way of insisting led to such a deterioration of the situation that he effectively had to leave the Bank. It seems clear that there was no longer a team in the security service, when I review the versions of the ten security officers who testified for the employer and for the complainant.
The evidence demonstrated that there were two clans. One clan shared Mr. Gauthier's approach, while the other felt knocked about, insecure and stressed. The complainant's counsel finds it paradoxical that the security officer witnesses for the employer complained both about Mr. Gauthier's absence from their work sites and about the constant surveillance to which they were subjected. But what I gathered from this testimony was that while deploring the lack of support from their division head, they thought they were being surveilled by the clan that was favourable to Mr. Gauthier. To them, this was confirmed by the phrase 'I have heard that ...'.
"All of the officers who testified for the employer stated that since Mr. Gauthier's departure the work environment was now normal under the management of a new division head. They were no longer witnessing disputes between their division head and Mr. Richard or Mr. Murphy.
"The organizational structure probably did not help in resolving the conflicts among Messrs. Gauthier, Richard and Murphy. I need not take a position on this organization. That falls within the employer's sphere of management. Having said that, even if I were to conclude that this structure was not adequate this would not mean that the employer,
in its decision to dismiss Mr. Gauthier, acted in bad faith
"Mr. Gauthier did not feel he was supported by management and this was undermining his credibility and authority. If management did not agree with the complainant's positions and was altering his decisions, this obviously resulted in a loss of credibility both with his co-workers and with his subordinates. The complainant's counsel points out that the decision to withdraw Mr. Murphy from Mr. Gauthier's orders impugned his credibility. While acknowledging that this action by the employer was not very diplomatic, I am obliged to consider the content of letter S-34, which Mr. Gauthier had sent to Mr. Murphy the day before. This was certainly not the best way in which to establish his authority. In any event, I saw this decision not as a manifestation of bad faith but rather as an act of exasperation by the employer in light of the ongoing conflict between Mr. Gauthier and Mr. Murphy. Mr. Aiken may very well say that this decision had nothing to do with this conflict and that it applied simultaneously in Montréal and in Toronto, but it seems to me that the coincidence is huge. Indeed, this decision was taken the day after Mr. Gauthier's letter (S-34) and on the day preceding its sending management was exhorting the complainant to inform Mr. Murphy of his expectations. Generally speaking, it seems to me that a decision pertaining to changes in line authority is not taken within a few hours. Whatever the case, I was given no evidence that this decision was tainted by bad faith, but rather was motivated by an attempt to resolve a conflict.
"
The complainant's counsel argued at length that Mr. Gauthier had not been informed or formally notified that his conduct was not accepted by management. He says, inter alia, that 2 days after his evaluation, Mr. Gauthier was dismissed. First, this is not a case in which the gradation of punishments is the appropriate procedure.
Mr. Gauthier did not need to be punished, he was
not engaging in misconduct. It was his ability to manage his staff and compromise with his co-workers and management that was at issue.
Furthermore, I do not have the same understanding of the evidence. Mr. Gauthier had been given his evaluation in October 1995 and one can observe in his letter of October 17 (P-12) how he reacted.
"
Mr. Aiken and Mr. Lynch did not treat this matter as a disciplinary matter. They, and particularly Mr. Lynch, tried to help Mr. Gauthier. When the complaints began in 1994, Mr. Lynch intervened with the complainant. He also organized the Richard Gauthier meeting in May 1995.
He asked the complainant to take a leadership course.
"Mr. Lynch often pointed out to Mr. Gauthier that he had to resolve his problems himself. As Mr. Lynch noted in his letter of November 24, 1995 (P-8), Mr. Gauthier was at a point of no return.
'I personally feel Michel is at the point of no return. His problems are really character faults that would be difficult to overcome.'
"
The evidence I heard corresponds to what can be read in Mr. Lynch's evaluation (P-3) and in his letter of November 24, 1995 (P-8). Mr. Lynch's credibility was never challenged by the complainant, and still less his integrity and judgment. The complainant himself said that he maintained excellent relations with Mr. Lynch. Mr. Lynch even suggested that Mr. Gauthier work for him in Ottawa. There was no position available. The Bank's decision is based on Mr. Lynch's evaluation. I do not see how I could substitute my judgment for his. I am unable to do so and I have no reason to do so. I see even less reason to hold that the evaluation that he made was malicious, discriminatory or made in bad faith.
" (Emphasis added)
Applicant's Submissions