[31]
In this same judgment, Marceau, J.A., makes an excellent analysis of the notion of dismissal as provided in the
Code
:
"[17] The distinction between the two major types of dismissal which may give rise to a remedy under s. 61.5 of the
Canada Labour Code
(s. 242 since the coming into effect of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1985) of course presents no difficulty in conceptual terms.
No one has any trouble distinguishing in theory between a dismissal imposed because of an employee's misconduct and a dismissal resulting from an employee's inability to perform the duties of his position with the necessary skill and competence. In practice, however, the confusion between these two types of dismissal, one known as 'disciplinary' and the other as 'administrative'
, seems to be quite frequent, and this is sometimes readily understandable as the employee's failure to perform his duties will often be due to both misconduct and lack of aptitude, but this in my opinion is always unfortunate.
It is unfortunate because the distinction between the two types of dismissal has important consequences, in my opinion, for the function which the adjudicator is required to perform in acting on the employee's complaint
.
"[18] It is hardly worth repeating that while this new remedy under s. 61.5 (now s. 242) completely modified the employer's right of dismissal - to preclude the arbitrary action which might be committed by the latter and ensure continuity of employment - it has not abolished that right. The employer still has a right of 'just' dismissal, which undoubtedly means, as I have had occasion to observe [see footnote 1: In my reasons in
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce v. Boivert
, [1986] 2 F.C. 431, at p. 441], '
dismissal based on an objective, real and substantial cause, independent of caprice, convenience or purely personal disputes, entailing action taken exclusively to ensure the effective operation of the business
'. In all cases of complaints by dismissed employees pursuant to s. 61.5, the adjudicator must ascertain whether the employer simply acted within the limits of his 'right of just dismissal', and it is for the employer to persuade him of this:
however, the evidence required from the employer to satisfy the adjudicator clearly cannot be the same or have the same purpose in both types of dismissal
.
"[19] In the case of a disciplinary dismissal, the adjudicator cannot be satisfied without proof that the act or acts of alleged misconduct were actually committed and that they were sufficiently serious to justify breaking the contract of employment;
but in the case of an 'administrative dismissal', the evidence cannot relate to positive facts of the same type or be as strict and precise. An adjudicator does not have the opportunity, nor often the capacity, to rule conclusively on an employee's competence and ability to meet the requirements of a position
. What the employer must prove, given this definition of just dismissal which I suggested, is
that he acted with complete objectivity, responsibility, independent of any passing whim, without discrimination and solely for the good of his undertaking
.
"[20]
An attempt has been made to clarify what must established still further. Thus, in
Edith Cavel Private Hospital and Hospital Employees' Union, Local 180
(1982), 6 L.A.C. (3d) 229 (B.C.), the adjudicator Hope said the following
:
... An employer who seeks to dismiss an employee for a nonculpable deficiency in job performance must meet certain criteria:
(a) The employer must define the level of job performance required.
(b) The employer must establish that the standard expected was communicated to the employees.
(c) The employer must show it gave reasonable supervision and instruction to the employee and afforded the employee a reasonable opportunity to meet the standard.
(d) The employer must establish an inability on the part of the employee to meet the requisite standard to an extent that renders her incapable of performing the job and that reasonable efforts were made to find alternate employment within the competence of the employee.
(e) The employer must disclose that reasonable warnings were given to the employee that a failure to meet the standard could result in dismissal.
"For my part, I think that what must be proven will vary depending on the case but will always have to be established in accordance with the definition of 'just dismissal', as I said I understood it, and consistent therefore with what is to be determined,
namely the reasonableness of the employer's appraisal of the employee's lack of competence
," (Emphasis added)
Application Of The Principles To This Case