[5]
In
Chen v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, 2002 FCT 480, [2002] F.C.J. No. 647 (QL) (
Chen
), the Court overturned the Board's decision where it failed to make a determination in clear language on whether or not the claimant, since her departure from China, was a Falun Gong practitioner. In doing so, the Court stated:
[19] I have reviewed the Board's decision and I have come to the conclusion that the Board did not make any finding with respect to whether the applicant was a member of the Falun Gong group. The Board did not believe the applicant's story with respect to her persecution in China but it did not address whether she was a member of the group. This finding was necessary in order to determine whether or not the applicant was a Convention refugee. The decision does not address the Falun Gong activities in Toronto. This evidence should have been considered (see
Jian Jiang v. M.C.I.
2002 FCT 64; [2002] F.C.J. No. 84 (QL)). It was a reviewable error for the Board not to make this determination.
[...]
[21] The Board in this case made a finding that it did not believe that the applicant herself had been persecuted but that is not the end of the matter. The applicant can show that the fear the applicant has is based on the acts committed or likely to be committed against others who belong to the same group as does the applicant. There is evidence in the record that members of the Falun Gong group have been persecuted in China. The applicant's refugee claim could succeed based on her membership in the Falun Gong if the Board was to find that members of the Falun Gong group were or were likely to be persecuted. This is why it was so important to determine in clear language whether or not the applicant was a member of Falun Gong. The Board did not complete the analysis with respect to persecution due to the applicant's membership in Falun Gong as it did not determine whether or not she was a member of Falon [
sic
] Gong. This was a reviewable error by the Board.