[21]
In the case of an application for a stay of the decision of a removals officer, the Court must not only determine whether a serious issue is raised, but should go further and consider the merits of the application and the likelihood of success. As explained by Justice Pelletier in
Wang v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
(2001), 204 F.T.R. 5; 2001 FCT 148, at para. 10, this higher threshold is justified where the result of the interlocutory motion will in essence amount to a final determination of the action:
"The Supreme Court of Canada has held that the test of 'serious issue to be tried' is simply that the issue being raised is one which is not frivolous.
R.J.R. MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General)
, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 311, at paragraph 44. On the other hand, to succeed in the underlying judicial review, the applicant will have to show that the decision not to defer was subject to review for error of law, jurisdictional error, factual error made capriciously, or denial of natural justice:
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, s. 18.1(4) [as enacted by S.C. 1990, c. 8, s. 5]. The result is that if the stay is granted, the relief sought will have been obtained on a finding that the question raised is not frivolous. If the stay is not granted and the matter proceeds to the application for judicial review, the applicant will have to demonstrate a substantive ground upon which the relief sought should be awarded. The structure of the process allows the applicant to obtain his/her relief on a lower standard on the interlocutory application, notwithstanding the fact that the relief is the same as that sought in [page 692] the judicial review application. It is this congruence of the relief sought in the interlocutory and the final application which leads me to conclude that if the same relief is sought, it ought to be obtained on the same basis in both applicaitons. I am therefore of the view that where a motion for a stay is made from a removal officer's refusal to defer removal, the judge hearing the motion ought not simply apply the 'serious issue' test, but should go further and closely examine the merits of the underlying application."