[37]
The RPD should consider alternatives to full disclosure in order to strike a balance between the need for disclosure and the right to privacy. Where competing interests are at play, an "all-or-nothing approach" is simply not appropriate. In this vein, I find the Supreme Court of Canada's comments in
A.M. v. Ryan
, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 157; 207 N.R. 81; 85 B.C.A.C. 81; 138 W.A.C. 81 at paras. 33-34 instructive:
"It follows that if the court considering a claim for privilege determines that a particular document or class of documents must be produced to get at the truth and prevent an unjust verdict, it must permit production to the extent required to avoid that result. On the other hand, the need to get at the truth and avoid injustice does not automatically negate the possibility of protection from full disclosure. In some cases, the court may well decide that the truth permits of nothing less than full production. This said, I would venture to say that an order for partial privilege will more often be appropriate in civil cases where, as here, the privacy interest is compelling. Disclosure of a limited number of documents, editing by the court to remove non-essential material, and the imposition of conditions on who may see and copy the documents are techniques which may be used to ensure the highest degree of confidentiality and the least damage to the protected relationship, while guarding against the injustice of cloaking the truth.
"In taking this approach, I respectfully decline to follow the all-or-nothing approach adopted by the majority of the Supreme Court of the United States of endorsing an absolute privilege for all psychotherapeutic records in
Jaffee v. Redmond
, supra. The Court of Appeals in the judgment there appealed from, 51 F.3d 1346 (1995), had held that the privilege could be denied if 'in the interests of justice, the evidentiary need for the disclosure of the contents of a patient's counseling sessions outweighs that patient's privacy interests' (p. 1357). The majority in the Supreme Court, per Stevens J., rejected that approach, stating that to make confidentiality depend upon a trial judge's later evaluation of the relative importance of the patient's interest in privacy and the evidentiary need for disclosure would be 'little better than no privilege at all' (p. 1932)."