[9]
Although the evidence suggests that the sale of the counterfeit items has been continuous since the date of the last judgment of this Court involving the same store and subject matter (June 8, 2004, Court File T-209-04), there have been six distinct incidents after that date that are of direct relevance to this action.
1. On March 17, 2006, an investigator attended at the K2 Fashions store, personally served Mr. Yang with a cease and desist letter and asked him to deliver up all inventory that bore the LV Trade-marks. Mr. Yang delivered up 130 items, including purses, wallets and jewellery, bearing the counterfeit LV Trade-marks or counterfeit copies of the Copyrighted Works.
2. On June 28, 2006, an investigator acting on behalf of Louis Vuitton purchased a counterfeit necklace bearing a LV Trade-mark.
3. On January 24, 2007, an investigator purchased a counterfeit change purse bearing several of the LV Trade-marks and observed a large number of counterfeit bags, wallets, purses and scarves all bearing the LV Trade-marks.
4. On March 12, 2007, an investigator served another cease and desist letter on a clerk at the store and asked the clerk to deliver up all Louis Vuitton inventory. The clerk delivered up 239 items including purses, wallets, key chains and jewellery, bearing the counterfeit Louis Vuitton Trade-marks or counterfeit copies of the Copyrighted Works, along with catalogues offering for sale unauthorized LV items.
5. On May 23, 2007, the investigator again attended at the K2 store and observed more than 50 items bearing LV Trade-marks. The investigator served the Defendant, Ms. Lin, with another cease and desist letter. Ms. Lin immediately instructed an employee to lock up the store. From the behaviour of the Defendant, Ms. Lin, and the prior incidents of infringement, I am satisfied that the products viewed by the investigator were counterfeit.
6. On September 27, 2007, an investigator purchased a necklace bearing one of the LV Trade-marks from the K2 store. During the visit, the investigator observed earrings and other necklaces bearing the LV Trade-marks.