 [8] 
  The pertinent provisions of the agreement are set out below. 
 
 
 
 " 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, RELEASE AND DISCHARGE 
 
 
 
 "WHEREAS the parties agree to settle all outstanding issues related to Ms. Lusina's employment with Bell without any admission of responsibility by one party or the other, the whole according to the terms and conditions outlined hereinafter: 
 
 
 
 "IT IS MUTUALLY AGREED THAT: 
 
 
 
 1. The preamble is an integral part of this agreement; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 7. Bell agrees to reimburse legal fees incurred by Ms. Lusina as follows: 
 
 
 
 a) To [X], Barristers & Solicitor, in trust, a maximum amount of $1,262.60, all taxes included; 
 
 
 
 b) To [Y], Barristers & Solicitors, in trust, a maximum amount of $3,017.40, all taxes included; 
 
 
 
 8. In consideration of the above, Ms. Lusina hereby grants to Bell, all its affiliates, all its predecessor and successor companies, parent companies and to their directors, officers, employees and/or agents, a full and final release and discharge with respect to any right, action, claim, cause of action or complaint, damage or debt that she has, had or may have against it or them, in respect of her employment with Bell or the termination of that employment and without restricting the generality of the foregoing any claims to salary, benefits, short-term or long-term disability benefits stock options, outstanding vacation, notice, severance or termination payments to which Ms. Lusina may be legally entitled under statute or otherwise; 
 
 
 
 9. Moreover, Ms. Lusina expressly waives her right to exercise any recourse or to institute any proceeding of any nature whatsoever against Bell, all its affiliates, all its predecessor and successor companies, parent companies and to their directors, officers, employees and/or agents because of her employment or the termination of this employment and the surrounding circumstances; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 11. Ms. Lusina fully acknowledges that she has been represented by Counsel with respect to this Acknowledgement, Release and Discharge. Ms. Lusina recognizes that this Acknowledgement, Release and Discharge has been explained to her by Counsel, that she understands it and that she signs it voluntarily; [...]" 
 
 