[44]
Rothstein, J.A., for the Court in
Apotex Inc. et al. v. Canada (Minister of National Health and Welfare) et al.
(1999), 252 N.R. 72; 3 C.P.R.(4th) 1 (F.C.A.) at paragraphs 22, 27 and 28 spoke of "
relief
" available to generics in the form of "
costs, loss and damage
" in the event that ineligible patents were listed:
"22. Our second reason for not interfering with the discretion exercised by the Minister in this case relates to the scheme of the
Regulations
themselves. The
Regulations
expressly provide a process by which generic manufacturers may obtain relief in the event they are prejudiced by reason of ineligible patents being included on the Register. Subsection 6(1) and paragraph 6(5)(a) provide in relevant part:
'6(1) A first person may, within 45 days after being served with a notice of an allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b) or (c), apply to a court for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance until after the expiration of a patent that is the subject of the allegation.
. . . . .
'6(5) In a proceeding in respect of an application under subsection (1), the court may, on the motion of a second person, dismiss the application
(a) if the court is satisfied that the patents at issue are not eligible for inclusion on the register ...'
. . . . .
"27. Paragraph 8(1)(a) specifically provides that a patent holder whose prohibition application is dismissed is liable for the loss suffered by a generic manufacturer for the delay incurred in the issuance of a Notice of Compliance to the generic by reason of the prohibition application. Under subsection 8(4), the Court has been given jurisdiction to make an award of damages or lost profits. Section 8 of the
Regulations
makes it apparent that the Governor in Council recognized that generic manufacturers could be subject to unjustified prohibition applications, including applications based upon ineligible patents on the Register and provided a remedy in the form of an award of damages or lost profits in such circumstances.
"28. In sum, there is a comprehensive scheme provided in the
Regulations
which specifically addresses ineligible patents on the Register and the costs, loss and damage suffered by generic manufacturers arising from such ineligible patents being included on the Register. Having regard to the scheme and its recognition that ineligible patents may be included on the Register, it follows that there is no unlawful refusal to exercise discretion by the Minister in not deleting such patents from the Register under subsection 3(1)."