[1]
Blanchard, J.
: The applicant, Joseph Di Bianca, seeks judicial review of the decision of a Visa Officer dated June 12, 2002, whereby the Visa Officer determined that the applicant was inadmissible because the applicant was convicted in the United States of "knowingly or intentionally possessing a controlled or counterfeit substance", namely cocaine. The Visa Officer determined that the equivalent criminal offence in Canada was paragraph 4(3)(a) of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
, 1996, c. 19. The equivalent offence is a dual character offence and is punishable by way of indictment and renders the offender liable for a term of imprisonment not exceeding seven years.
Facts
[2]
The applicant, Joseph Di Bianca, is an American citizen married to a Canadian citizen, Kelly Waxman, who sponsored the applicant. The sponsorship was approved by the respondent on April 12, 1973, and on March 7, 2001, a file was opened in the respondent's Buffalo Office.
[3]
On April 3, 2001, Mr. Di Bianca pled guilty in Pennsylvania of possession of cocaine and was placed on probation for one year. He was required to perform one hundred hours of community service and pay court costs.
[4]
In the refusal letter of June 12, 2001, the Visa Officer cited paragraph 19(1)(c.1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended, as the grounds of inadmissibility with respect to the applicant's offence.
Issues
[5]
The respondent concedes that the Visa Officer erred by basing the refusal on paragraph 19(1)(c.1) as that section provides that a person is inadmissible if the offence is punishable "... by a maximum of ten years or more." and the equivalent offence found by the Visa Officer was punishable by a term of imprisonment not exceeding seven years.
[6]
The respondent, however, submits that the equivalent offence cited by the Visa Officer could render the applicant inadmissible, in any event, under paragraph 19(2)(a.1) of the
Immigration Act
, as the applicant has been convicted of an offence that "may" be punishable by way of indictment "... by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years."
[7]
The following are the issues that remain to be determined in this application:
(i) Whether the error by the Visa Officer in referencing the wrong section of the
Immigration Act
is material and warrants the intervention of the Court?
(ii) Whether the Visa Officer erred in his determination as to which provision of the applicable Canadian statute should the Pennsylvania offence be equated to?
(iii) Whether the Visa Officer had a duty to act in accordance with subsection 3(c) of the
Immigration Act
?
Legislative framework
[8]
Subsection 3(c) and section 19 of the
Immigration Act
read as follows:
"3. Immigration objectives - It is hereby declared that Canadian Immigration policy and the rules and regulations made under this Act shall be designed and administered in such a manner as to promote the domestic and international interest of Canada recognizing the need
. . . . .
(c) to facilitate the reunion in Canada of Canadian citizens and permanent residents with their close relatives from abroad;
. . . . .
"19(1)
No person
shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
(c.1) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe
(i) have been convicted outside Canada of an offence that, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence
that may be punishable under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of ten years or more
, or
. . . . .
except persons who have satisfied the Minister that they have rehabilitated themselves and that at least five years have elapsed since the expiration of any sentence imposed for the offence or since the commission of the act or omission, as the case may be;
"19(2)
No immigrant
and, except as provided in subsection (3),
no visitor
shall be granted admission if the immigrant or visitor is a member of any of the following classes:
. . . . .
(a.1) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe
(i) have been convicted outside Canada of an offence that, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence
that may be punishable by way of indictment under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years
, or
. . . . .
except persons who have satisfied the Minister that they have rehabilitated themselves and that at least five years have elapsed since the expiration of any sentence imposed for the offence or since the commission of the act or omission, as the case may be;" (Emphasis added.)
"3 Objectifs en matière d'immigration - La politique canadienne d'immigration ainsi que les règles et règlements pris en vertu de la présente loi visent, dans leur conception et leur mise en oeuvre, à promouvoir les intérêts du pays sur les plans intérieur et international et reconnaissent la nécessité:
. . . . .
c) de faciliter la réunion au Canada des citoyens canadiens et résidents permanents avec leurs proches parents de l'étranger;
. . . . .
"19(1) Les personnes suivantes appartiennent à une catégorie non admissible:
c.1) celles don't il y a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'elles ont, à l'étranger:
(i) soit été déclarées coupables d'une infraction qui, si elle était commise au Canada, constituerait une infraction qui pourrait être punissable, aux termes d'une loi fédérale, d'un emprisonnement maximal égal ou supérieur à dix ans, sauf si elles peuvent justifier auprès du ministre de leur réadaptation et du fait qu'au moins cinq ans se sont écoulés depuis l'expiration de toute peine leur ayant été infligée pour l'infraction,
. . . . .
"19(2) Appartiennent à une catégorie non admissible les immigrants et, sous réserve du paragraphe (3), les visiteurs qui:
. . . . .
a.1) sont des personnes don't il y a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'elles ont, à l'étranger:
(i) soit été déclarées coupables d'une infraction qui, si elle était commise au Canada, constituerait une infraction
qui pourrait être punissable, aux termes d'une loi fédérale, par mise en accusation, d'un emprisonnement maximal de moins de dix ans
, sauf si elles peuvent justifier auprès du ministre de leur réadaptation et du fait qu'au moins cinq ans se sont écoulés depuis l'expiration de toute peine leur ayant été infligée pour l'infraction," (Je souligne.)
[9]
Section 4 of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
reads as follows:
"4(1) Except as authorized under the regulations, no person shall possess a substance included in Schedule I, II or III.
. . . . .
"(3) Every person who contravenes subsection (1) where the subject-matter of the offence is a substance included in Schedule I
(a) is guilty of an
indictable offence
and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years; or
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction
and liable
(i) for a first offence, to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both, and
(ii) for a subsequent offence, to a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or to both." (Emphasis added.)
"4(1) Sauf dans les cas autorisés aux termes des règlements, la possession de toute substance inscrite aux annexes I, II ou III est interdite.
. . . . .
"(3) Quiconque contrevient au paragraphe (1) commet, dans le cas de substances inscrites à l'annexe I:
a) soit un
acte criminel passible
d'un emprisonnement maximal de sept ans;
b) soit une infraction punissable sur déclaration de culpabilité par
procédure sommaire
et passible:
(i) s'il s'agit d'une première infraction, d'une amende maximale de mille dollars et d'un emprisonnement maximal de six mois, ou de l'une de ces peines,
(ii) en cas de récidive, d'une amende maximale de deux mille dollars et d'un emprisonnement maximal d'un an, ou de l'une de ces peines." (Je souligne.)
Analysis
[10]
Although the Visa Officer did reference the wrong section of the
Immigration Act
in his refusal letter I am of the view that this error, admitted to by the respondent, is not fatal to the Visa Officer's decision. It is useful to reproduce in part the Visa Officer's letter of June 12, 2001, refusing the applicant's application.
"You are a member of the inadmissible class of persons described in section 19 (1)(c.1) of the
Immigration Act, 1993
in that you have been convicted of the following offences in the United States of America:
Knowingly or intentionally possessing a controlled or counterfeit substance
"This offence, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence that may be punishable under section 4(1) of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
- 'Possession of substance'. This offence is punishable by way of indictment and renders the offender liable, upon conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years. The substance in question is Cocaine (benzoylmethylecgonine) which is described in Schedule 1 of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
.
"You were convicted in April 2001 of 'Knowingly or intentionally possessing a controlled or counterfeit substance' under Article 780-113, para. 16 of the
Unconsolidated Pennsylvania Statutes: Title 35; Health and Safety; Drugs, Poisons and Dangerous Substances Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act
.
"Your sentence, handed down to you on April 3rd 2001 was: one year probation, one hundred hours of community service and repayment of court costs in the amount of US$146.50.
"You are not eligible for rehabilitation. Section 19(1)(c.1) of Canada's
Immigration Act
exempts persons from this inadmissible class if they have satisfied the Governor in Council that they have rehabilitated themselves and that at least five years have elapsed since the termination of the sentence imposed for the offence. In your case however, you have not completed the original sentence that you were handed in the US, therefore I believe that you have not rehabilitated yourself and the requisite five year period has not elapsed. Therefore, you have not eligible for consideration."
[11]
The Visa Officer's letter is clear as to the reason he was found to be inadmissible. He was convicted in the United States of an offence, the equivalent of which in Canada would be punishable by a term not exceeding seven years. The only error committed by the Visa Officer was that he referred to paragraph 19(1)(c.1) instead of subparagraph 19(2)(a.1)(i). In my view, in the circumstances of this case, this is not a reviewable error. By referring to the term "not exceeding seven years" it is apparent that the Visa Officer was intending to refer to subparagraph 19(2)(a.1)(i). From a practical perspective, to return this decision for rehearing would most assuredly lead to another refusal letter with reference to the appropriate section of the
Immigration Act
. The applicant in his written submissions recognizes that "... just overturning the decision, however, would only lead to further litigation unless this Honourable Court rules whether equivalency pertains to subparagraph 19(2)(a.1)(i) or (b)(ii) of the
Act
." I agree with the applicant's argument and, consequently, will now deal with the equivalency issue.
[12]
The applicant contends that the applicant was convicted of a "misdemeanor-only" offence, and that the equivalent offence under the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
, would logically be a summary-only offence, notably paragraph 4.(3)(b) of the
Act
.
[13]
The respondent submits that the
Act
clearly designates equivalent offences that "MAY" be punishable by way of indictment and contends that the Visa Officer is under no duty to assume that the equivalent offence that might have been prosecuted in Canada would have been by way of summary conviction.
[14]
I am in agreement with the respondent's submissions. The
Act
clearly states that persons are inadmissible if the criminal offence committed outside Canada "may" be punishable by way of indictment. The
Act
clearly contemplates hybrid offences and in no way creates a duty to treat the offence as if it is not punishable by way of indictment.
[15]
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[16]
In the case before me, I am of the opinion that the Visa Officer did not err in equating the offence for which the applicant was convicted in Pennsylvania to subsection 4.(3) of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
. The
Act
is clear, the hybrid offence provides for punishment by way of indictment. This is sufficient for the purpose of subparagraph 19(2)(a.1)(i) to deny admission to the applicant.
[17]
The applicant further argues that the Visa Officer erred by failing to consider, in the circumstances of this case, whether issuance of a minister's permit in accordance with s. 3 of the
Immigration Act
would be appropriate. The applicant contends that this provision read with the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817; 243 N.R. 22, imposes a duty on the Visa Officer to administer the
Act
in accordance with s. 3 and, by failing to balance the interest of Canadians to reside in Canada with their spouse with the duty to shield Canadians from harm, breached this duty.
[18]
I have carefully considered the applicant's submissions and argument on this issue and conclude that they are without merit. The applicant did not request that his case be considered for the issuance of a Minister's permit. Further, even if such an obligation existed on the Visa Officer, there was no evidence before the Visa Officer on the circumstances and the effect or consequences of a refusal on the applicant's family, i.e. his wife. In
Soriano v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
(2000), 189 F.T.R. 104 (T.D.), this Court held that there is no duty on an Adjudicator to conduct an inquiry beyond the evidence presented. In any event, I cannot find, in the
Baker
case, authority for the proposition that there is a duty on a Visa Officer to consider whether a case is appropriate for the issuance of a Minister's permit when such a request has not been made.
[19]
I have also considered the submissions of both parties on the issue of costs and particularly the applicant's request for an award of significant legal fees. I have determined that in the circumstances of this case and in the exercise of my discretion that no costs be awarded.
[20]
For the above reasons this application for judicial review will be dismissed
[21]
The applicant proposed the certification of the following questions:
1. When equating a foreign conviction to the Canadian equivalent, does one seek the Canadian
provision
which most nearly equates to the foreign provision under which the conviction occurred à la
Brannson
; or does one look for the nearest Canadian provision relating to the
offence
giving rise to the foreign conviction? I[n] other words, does one equate the foreign
provision
with the closest Canadian provision or simply seek the closest Canadian provision relating to the offence committed abroad?
2. If, adopting the phrase Mr. Justice Nadon employed at Para. 13 in
Ngalla
, the foreign provision is one 'where no discretion is given to the Crown', to proceed by indictment; i.e., is a misdemeanour-only offence; and there is a Canadian provision which is a summary offence; i.e., s. 3(b) of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
; is that provision the equivalent provision; or, if, under Canadian law, the
offence
is one where the Crown may elect to proceed by indictment or summary-conviction, may the foreign misdemeanour-only offence be properly equated to a hybrid-provision because the Canadian
statute
contains distinct
provisions
allowing the Crown to proceed by indictment or by summary-conviction?
3. In view of the Supreme Court's ruling in
Mavis Baker
that officers have a duty to conduct themselves in accordance with s. 3(c) of the
Immigration Officer Act
, thereby, paraphrasing from Mr. Justice Linden in
Teresa
, "changing the legal landscape [and] demand[ing] even more of them", do officers who determine that a sponsored spouse is inadmissible have a duty either to inform the applicant of that finding
before
closing the file and invite submissions for a
minister's permit
or to reflect on that issue even in the absence of a formal request for such considerations? In other words, does the duty of an officer to act in accordance with s. 3 of the
Immigration Act
arise only where applicants are astute enough and sufficiently well-versed in provisions of the
Immigration Act
to ask the officers to conduct themselves in accordance with the law providing their raison d'être and which they have sworn to honour and uphold?
[22]
I have carefully considered the written submissions of both parties on the above proposed questions for certification. I conclude that the applicant has not raised a serious question of general importance that would be dispositive of the case as contemplated by section 83 of the
Immigration Act
. I do not propose to certify a question.
ORDER
[23]
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Geoffrey D. Peters/pdk
[End of document]
