 [14] 
  The PRRA Officer then stated the following: 
 
 
 
 "In addition to the above, Roma are also protected by the Constitution, which provides for individual rights, equality and protection against discrimination. Changes to the penal code have made it easier to enforce and stiffen penalties for hate crimes committed on the basis of the victim's ethnicity, race and nationality. . . . 
 
 
 
 "Also, the Government of Hungary provides its citizens with many avenues of recourse if they are not satisfied with the assistance of the police or a Government agent. Citizens can contact the Office of the Public Prosecutor, which is independent from the police. The Office of Public Prosecutor supervises and investigates into the legality of all police investigations. Furthermore, there is a legislative requirement that an investigation shall be automatically opened when a complaint is filed. 
 
 
 
 "A second avenue of recourse is the Ministry of Interior and the Ombudsman Office. A Victims' Protection Office operated in each country to provide psychological, medical, and social services to victims of crime. Besides the choices mentioned above there are a number of non-governmental agencies (NGO's) that give legal advice and assistance to Roma. 
 
 
 
 "It is acknowledged that there are some concerns with respect to living conditions for Roma in Hungary. However it is also acknowledged that the Government of Hungary has made serious efforts to orchestrate protection to the Roma and that they continue to improve on the standard of protection for Roma. 
 
 
 
 "It is noteworthy to point out that some of the events occurred to the applicant when he was a child attending public school. It is reasonable to conclude that the applicant will not return to school and as such there is a minimal risk of him experiencing this type of discrimination again. 
 
 
 
 "The events that occurred to the applicant's bride and her family are not personal to him. It does show that before 1998 similarly situated persons (Roma in Hungary) experienced difficulties. However it is acknowledged that the Government of Hungary has made serious efforts to orchestrate protection to the Roma and that they continue to improve on the standard of protection for Roma. Furthermore I considered all of the applicant's allegations and I conclude that the Government of Hungary can and will offer adequate protection to the applicant. 
 
 
 
 "In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the state is presumed to make efforts to protect its citizenry. The availability of state protection obviates the applicant's need for international protection. The principle is well-established in Canadian case law. 
 
 
 
 "The Supreme Court of Canada held in Ward that: 
 
 
 
 'Absent some evidence, the claim should fail, as nations should be presumed capable of protecting their citizens. Security of nationals is, after all, the essence of sovereignty. Absent a situation of complete breakdown of state apparatus, such as that recognized in Lebanon in Zalzali, it should be assumed that the state is capable of protecting a claimant. . . . Although this presumption increases the burden on the claimant, it does not render illusory Canada's provision of a haven for refugees. The presumption serves to reinforce the underlying rationale of international protection as a surrogate, coming into play where no alternative remains to the claimant. Refugee claims were never meant to allow a claimant to seek out better protection than that from which he or she benefits already. . . .' 
 
 
 
 "In the case at hand the applicant states that he was attacked at his home at the end of September/early October 1999. The applicant states, "they sprayed me with pepperspray, pushed their way into my home, threatened me . . . they told me not to report it to the police . . .". The applicant notes that he did not report this incident to the police. In consideration of Kadenko the onus is on the applicant to exhaust all avenues of recourse in his country of origin before seeking protection outside that country. The applicant failed to show that he exhausted all avenues of recourse before leaving Hungary. 
 
 
 
 "In Kadenko, the Federal Court of Appeal wrote: 
 
 
 
 'When the state in questions is a democratic state, as in the case at bar, claimants must do more than simply show that he or she went to see some members of the police force and that his or her efforts were unsuccessful. The burden of proof that rests on the claimant is in a way, directly proportional to the level of democracy in the state in question: the more democratic the state's institutions, the more the claimant must have done to exhaust all the courses of action open to him or her (See Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) v. Satiacum (1989), 99 N.R.171, at p.176 (F.C.A.), approved by Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689, at p.725, 103 D.L.R. (4th) 1.' 
 
 
 
 Kadenko v. Canada (Solicitor General) (1986), 143 D.L.R. (4th) 532 (F.C.A.) at p. 2 (Quicklaw version) 
 
 
 
 "In light of the information presented above, I find that there is adequate and meaningful protection available to the applicant if he returns to Hungary. As such I find that the applicant faces no more than a mere possibility of persecution if returned to Hungary. I also find that it is not likely that the applicant will be in danger of torture or suffer a risk to life or of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if he were to return to Hungary. 
 
 
 
 "Based on the foregoing the application is rejected under Section 96 and 97 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act." 
 
 
 