[10]
Duff, C.J., in Western Electric Co. and Northern Electric Co. v. Baldwin International Radio of Canada, [1934] S.C.R. 94 at 573 adds this for our consideration:
"It is necessary however ... to speak a word of caution ... The duty of the inventor to disclose with certainty the nature of the invention for which he claims protection is a duty owing to the public, as Lord Halsbury observes, and that duty arises out of important public considerations. The protection afforded him by the grant is strictly limited to the invention disclosed and specified. He cannot enlarge his monopoly beyond that which he has specified, or that for which he has claimed protection (in such a manner as to make it clear to those to whom the document is addressed) by reference to supposed intention gathered from some contemporary document which is not part of the specification and has never been made known to the public. Such a document may establish or support a contention that the true nature of the invention has not been disclosed, or that the best manner known to the inventor of performing it has not been made known; and such matters may redound to the disadvantage of the patentee because it is a double condition of his right to a grant that he has invented a new manufacture and that he has disclosed completely his invention.
But the rule limited his monopoly right to what is clearly disclosed by the specification is a rule of substantive law, which it is the duty of the court, in the public interest, to enforce
, and the application of it is quite independent of any question as to the admissibility in evidence of any particular document for some other purpose.
"All this is, no doubt, applied with some qualification where the issue concerns the validity of a patent or the validity of a claim; where the claim is attacked, for example, on the ground that it is so broadly expressed as to embrace matters not included in the invention, or to embrace matters in respect of which it is alleged that there was no novelty at the date of the patent; or on other cognate grounds. In passing upon such an issue, the courts, as in the case of other documents, have, where they have been satisfied that there was a meritorious invention, resorted to the maxim
ut res magis valeat quam pereat. And, where the language of the specification, upon a reasonable view of it, can be so read as to afford the inventor protection for that which he has actually in good faith invented, the court, as a rule, will endeavour to give effect to that construction
."
(underlining added)
And finally "the principle of fair construction of a patent claim must be applied in such a way as to give effect to the expressed or necessarily implied intent of the inventor as it would be understood by the assumed addressee of the patent, namely, the workman of ordinary skill in the art to which the invention relates" Ernest Scragg & Sons Limited v. Leesona Corporation, [1946] 26 Fox P.C. 1, at p. 57. President Thorson in Minerals Separation North American Corporation v. Noranda Mines Ltd., [1947] Ex. C.R. 36, at 319:
"There is no doubt that the specification is not well drawn, but
there is a vital difference between imperfection of draughtsmanship and noncompliance with statutory requirements
. There may be faults of expression that do not affect the validity of the patent. A patent specification is not an exercise in composition, and the court should not concern itself with faults of language that do not amount to breach of the statutory conditions for the grant of the patent. The proper attitude of mind of the court in construing a specification was well described by Sir George Jessell, M.R. in Hinks & Son v. Safety Lighting Co. (1876), 4 Ch.D. 607, at 612 when he said that it should be construed '
fairly, with a judicial anxiety to support a really useful invention if it can be supported on a reasonable construction of the patent
'. This statement has received full acceptance. The need for fair construction was stated by Lord Parmoor in the House of Lords in the Natural Colour v. Bioschemes case (supra), at page 270. The Supreme Court of Canada has also shown the same attitude. In French's Complex Ore Reduction Co. v. Electrolytic Zinc Process Co. (1930), S.C.R. 462 at 470 Rinfret, J., as he then was, in delivering the judgment of the court, approved Sir George Jessel's statement and said that the specification '
should not be construed astutely
'. And in Baldwin International Radio Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Western Electric Co. Inc. et al. (1934), S.C.R. 94 at 106, Rinfret, J., again speaking for the court, said that the respondents were entitled to have the claims interpreted '
by a mind willing to understand, not by a mind desirous of misunderstanding
', thus approving the remarks of Chitty, J., in Lister v. Norton Brothers and Co. (1886), 3 R.P.C. 199, at 203."
(underlining added)