[12]
At first blush, the plaintiff's position seemed straightforward and unassailable. The evidence-in-chief of Mr. K.G. Fernström, the plaintiff's expert witness, carefully dealt with his analysis of the construction of the specification of the parallel keeping patent. We were instructed that the invention relates to a means and apparatus for achieving the automatic parallel displacement in the feed shell in a hydraulically operated drill boom mounted on horizontal and vertical pivots with the feed shell swingable with respect to the boom on vertical and horizontal pivots. Either Mr. Fernström or Mr. Erik V. Kimber (one of the inventors) said that what concerns the patentee with existing booms is that, if you want to displace the feed shell keeping it horizontal or at a certain angle to horizontal, you have to adjust each of the hydraulic rams separately which it is alleged is time-consuming and requires experience, and which the patentee proposed to eliminate. The patentee then reads on to show what he proposes to do to provide parallel motion of the feed in the vertical plane; and then "there is according to the invention provided a hydraulic parallel motion means and drill boom supported rods drilling apparatus, in which a drill boom is adapted for automatic parallel displacement of feed shell between the various drilling positions thereof ... and being provided with hydraulic rams pivotally coupled across the pivot means for adjustment of the angle of elevation and the angle of lateral swing on the one hand between the boom support and its drill boom and on the other between the drill boom and the feed shell said parallel motions means and rock drilling apparatus being characterized thereby that there is coupled a hydraulic pilot ram across the horizontal pivot axis on the boom support and along said drill boom pivotally between said boom support and an intermediate portion of said drill boom for purposes of sensing the setting of the elevation angle at said horizontal pivot axis, and that hydraulic elevation ram of the horizontal pivot axis adjacent said feed shell is hydraulically slave coupled to the hydraulic pilot ram over an elevation adjustment circuit for keeping constant the difference in elevation angle between the elevation angles at said horizontal pivot means during hydraulic actuation of the hydraulic elevation angle ram mounted for cooperation with the horizontal pivot means of said boom support." The patentee then stated: "The above and other objects of the invention will become obvious from the following description and from the accompanying drawings in which a number of preferred embodiments of the invention are illustrated by way of example. It should be understood that these embodiments are only illustrative of the invention and various further modifications may be made within the scope of the claims."