[25]
The rollover rotation also has advantages cited by Mr. Fernström - "the importance of the rollover is for being able to drill exactly where you want to drill the holes. (He illustrates by reference to Exhibit P-9):
"When you then lift the feed up and drill in the roof, you do not have to rotate because what you want, when you then use the lookout angle, you want to drill perpendicular to the roof or along the roof with a minimum space in between the rock drill and the wall.
"The same thing: If you drill in the wall, you rotate the boom 90 degrees. That way you will get the top of the rock drill where you only have 85 millimetres of space needed between the wall and the centre of the rock drill to have room for the rock drill.
"It means that you can get very smooth walls when you drill into the tunnel.
"When you drill in the bottom of the tunnel, you rotate the rollover 180 degrees, and then you also get the minimum look-out and you get a very flat surface of the tunnel when you blast it.
"Of couse, the advantage with this rollover rotation compared to all other types of rotation where you have the rotation in the rear end of the boom is that this rotation always stays parallel to the feed and the rock drill.
"So, in any position, you have the feed here. If the tunnel is, for instance, turning or going up or down, then you have to angle the feed to make the tunnel in the correct direction.
"Then you know when you rotate the feed always stays parallel. That is the uniqueness of this rollover.
"The other point with the blind sport is that if you do not have a rotation, when you try to move the feed on this boom, for instance, if you try to move the feed below the boom, the feed will hit the boom. So you will get a dead space there or a blind spot it is also called.
"The advantage with the rollover boom, if you only have 90 degrees, you still get one quarter of the tunnel that will be a dead spot, but without 180 degree rotation or more, you know that you can rotate 180 degrees and then the feed can pass under the boom when you go over on the right side here.
"That way, you eliminate the dead spot and you can drill holes all over the tunnel.
"In our case, you have a small dead spot left here but that
we cover up by mounting two booms beside each other
so it has no practical influence on the drilling results."
(Underlining is mine)