 [4] 
  By decision dated December 15, 1997, the Registrar of Trademarks rejected Apotex's opposition stating his reasons as follows: 
 
 
 
 "The evidence establishes that the applicant has always sold its 200 microgram dosage of misoprostol under the trademark CYTOTEC in a white, hexagonal tablet. The tablet is scored in the middle on both sides with a line and is lightly scored on one side with the word SEARLE above the middle line and the numerals 1461 below it. The opponent contends that sales of the applicant's tablets in that form do not constitute use of the applied for trademark because of the addition of the word SEARLE and the numerals. However, in view of the fact that the indicia SEARLE and 1461 are only lightly scored on one side of the tablet and are barely legible, it seems likely that the white shape of the tablet would stand out as its dominant feature. Thus, the public would, as a matter of first impression, perceive use of the actual table as also being use of the tablet's white shape alone ... 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "The opponent submitted that the drawing does not comply with Section 30(h) because the applicant effectively eliminated any shape restriction for its mark by including the statement that the tablet shown in dotted outline does not form part of the mark. The opponent contended that such a statement means that the applicant is claiming the color white 'per se' as its trademark apart from the tablet itself. 
 
 
 
 "Although the statement referred to by the opponent is somewhat ambiguous and confusing, the initial portion of the description of the trademark in the application clearly limits the mark to the whole of the visible surface of the tablet. The statement referred to by the opponent appears to be simply an indication that the applicant is not claiming the tablet as its trademark but only the shape of the tablet as it defines the limits of the claim to the color white. At the oral hearing, the applicant's agent indicated that the statement simply means that the applicant is not claiming rights in hexagonal tablets 'per se'. Given the ambiguity in the statement, however, it should not have been included in the description of the mark although it was apparently only included to satisfy a practice requirement of the Examination Division ... 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "The applicant's application is narrowly restricted to the specific drug misoprostol in a specific dosage and it appears that no one else is selling that drug in any form much less in the form of a white, hexagonal tablet. Furthermore, the Clarke affidavit evidences significant sales of the applicant's tablet for a number of years. Finally, the applicant has distributed advertising materials which promote the color and shape of the applicant's tablets. Thus, in accordance with the opposition decision in  
 Burroughs Wellcome Inc. 
 , the evidence suggests that the applicant's trademark can distinguish the applicant's specific product from other pharmaceutical products. Unlike the situation in  
 Novopharm Ltd. v. Searle Canada Inc. 
  (1995), 60 C.P.R.(3d) 400 at p. 404 (T.M.O.B.), the evidence does not establish that other pharmaceutical manufacturers sell drugs in the form of the applicant's tablet for the treatment of the same or similar medical conditions for which the applicant's drug is prescribed. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "In the present case, whatever monopoly the applicant may have is for the drug misoprostol and not for the shape of the tablet. The hexagonal shape was not dictated by the teachings of any patent or any functional requirements. The evidence suggests that the applicant's tablet could have been produced in any number of shapes." 
 