[70]
At the basis of this conclusion lie three important findings by the RPD:
a. As explained in paragraph 18 of the Decision, there was documentary evidence before the RPD concerning the Pakistan government's Exit Control List which is used at exit points by immigration authorities to prevent the departure from Pakistan of wanted criminals and individuals under investigation. All international flights are reviewed. This means that, as explained in paragraph 19 of the Decision, the RPD found it "implausible that the claimant would not have been prevented from leaving Pakistan, or at least have been questioned by Pakistani immigration authorities had he been wanted by the Pakistan police or other state agencies in Azad Kashmir or Pakistan for political reasons, namely his anti-government UKPNP political activities in Azad Kashmir";
b. As pointed out in paragraph 21 of the Decision, the Applicant was instructed when he completed his PIF in July 2006 to attach copies of any police and other documents to support his claim. He was represented by counsel at the time. Yet the Applicant did not provide copies of a FIR or the Warrant of Arrest until over a year later. The RPD found that this delay "significantly undermines the authenticity and reliability of these documents - as well as the February 8, 2007 letter from the claimant's lawyer in District Poonch, Azad Kashmir, Pakistan."
c. The RPD also found that general documentary evidence on the UKPNP did not suggest any police or government mistreatment" of UKPNP members and activists in Azad Kashmir." The RPD concluded that "[b] ased upon this very recent documentary evidence on the UKPNP in Pakistan, had UKPNP members such as the claimant been the on-going victims of police and other state agents in Pakistan while the claimant was residing in Azad Kashmir between August 4, 2004 and April 28, 2006 I find it implausible that such incidents would not be reported in the substantive documentary evidence before me on the political situation in Pakistan, particularly POK or Azad Kashmir."