[13]
I cannot agree. First, the application of s. 49(1)(b) was not before the Court of Appeal in
Tsang
. Although the implication of
Tsang
is that the issuance of the "danger to the public" opinion terminates the Appeal Division's jurisdiction over the appeal, Marceau, J.A., did not go so far as to say that in such circumstances, the Appeal Division would be precluded from determining its own jurisdiction pursuant to s. 69.4(2) of the
Act
. In respect of s. 69.4(2), he commented:
"In a recent decision of the Appeal Division,
Watson v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, May 21, 1996, T94-07075 - on which counsel were invited to comment as a preliminary issue - a doubt was raised as to the validity of the question here certified by the motions judge. The author of the decision suggested that the application in the Trial Division was concerned with the validity of the Minister's opinion in the circumstances of the case, not with the consequence of its issuance on the sponsorship proceedings. The question as formulated was not before the motions judge, as required by s. 83 of the
Act
, and in fact could not be, since s. 69.4(2) of the
Act
reserves to the Appeal Division 'exclusive jurisdiction' to determine questions relating to its jurisdiction:
'69.4(2) The Appeal Division has, in respect of appeals made pursuant to ss. 70, 71 and 77, sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine all questions of law and fact, including questions of jurisdiction, that may arise in relation to the making of a removal order or the refusal to approve an application for landing made by a member of the family class.'
"In my respectful opinion, the point raised by the Appeal Division member is ill-taken. There is simply no distinction between the so-called 'validity' of the Minister's opinion as 'to the time and the circumstances in which it was issued' - the issue as presented in the review application - and its effect on the jurisdiction of the Appeal Division - which is obviously how the judge saw the application and disposed of it. The 'validity' of the Minister's opinion is necessarily dependant on its consequence; it will be said to be 'valid' if it produces the only thing it is meant to produce, i.e. if it extinguishes the appeal, the sole purpose of the ministerial power. On the other hand, the use by Parliament of the phrase 'exclusive jurisdiction' in s. 69.4(2) of the
Act
certainly has significance and mandates deference to the view of the Appeal Division when what is involved is a question of interpretation of the general scheme of the
Act
, as in the case of
Canada (Solicitor General) v. Kainth
(1994), 170 N.R. 367 (F.C.A.). However, it cannot be understood as restraining the constitutional power and duty of the court to dispose of a question of construction of a specific legislative provision establishing the jurisdiction of a tribunal by requiring that the views of the tribunal be sought first."
In my view, the above comments by Marceau, J.A., stand for the proposition that s. 69.4(2) does not have the effect of restraining the court from disposing of a question concerning the Appeal Division's jurisdiction without first allowing the Appeal Division the opportunity to deal with that question. It does
not
stand for the proposition that the issuance of a "danger to the public" opinion has the effect of precluding the Appeal Division from hearing and determining its jurisdiction under s. 69.4(2). Granted, any determination by the Appeal Division concerning its jurisdiction would have to be in accordance with the pronouncements of this court. Nonetheless, it is still open to the Appeal Division to "hear and dispose" of the applicant's appeal. Thus, counsel's argument regarding an indefinite stay being granted by virtue of s. 49(1)(b) cannot be sustained.