[2]
The facts are straightforward. Kaczmar challenges a competition in which one of the selection tools was a standardized test, In-Basket Exercise 820. The result of the com­petition was that 19 candidates were found qualified for appointment to the position in question, Team Coordinator, Audit. Kaczmar was not among them and exercised his right of appeal under s. 21 of the
Act
. It appears that Kaczmar did not meet the minimum score for In-Basket Exercise 820 whereas most of the successful candidates had scored 20 or more out of 30. Naturally enough, Kaczmar is curious as to how the In-Basket Exercise is scored, given his anomalous result. His request for disclosure of the test materials was met by a refusal on the part of the Public Service Commission to provide access to the materials or copies of it except upon terms which Kaczmar found unaccept­able. The grounds of the Public Service Commission's refusal was that disclosure would prejudice the continued use of the standardized test. According to the Chairper­son's reasons, the foundation for this claim was the assertion of a common sense prop­osition that if Kaczmar was given access to materials in which the candidate scored very high, it would be tantamount to giving him an answer sheet and would give him an unfair advantage in any subsequent writing of the test. On that basis, the Chairperson made an order as to disclosure which reads as follows:
"1. The appellant's representative, present­ly Dave Riffel of the Professional Institute of the Public Service, will be given unlimited time to review the test materials. The appellant, Mr. Kaczmar will be restricted to a period of 20 minutes of review for each test paper. Neither Mr. Riffel nor Mr. Kaczmar will be given access to the scoring manual for the IBE 820. Access to the scoring manual and test materials including the papers of Mr. Kaczmar and the successful candidates, will be given to an individual of the appel­lant's choosing, who has appropriate quali­fications to review and evaluate the test and scoring manual.
"2. Mr. Riffel will be allowed to take unrestricted personal notes and photocopies of the materials presented to him during disclosure. He may retain them in his possession for the purpose of this appeal, subject to his undertaking to maintain confidentiality of those materials, and subject further to paragraph 4 below.
"3. The appellant will be subject to a waiting period of 180 days before being permitted to write the IBE 820. This period will run from the last occasion on which he sees the test materials, whether at disclosure or at the hearing of his appeal.
"4. At the conclusion of the hearing into the merits of this appeal, all materials relevant to the IBE 820 in the possession of the appellant, his representative, and any other person to whom they may have been disclosed pursuant to paragraph 1, will be placed in a sealed envelope, to be retained on the Public Service Commission Appeal Board file. This will include their personal notes.
"5. In the event of an application for judi­cial review, the materials will be returned to the appellant's representative, on request. In the event that the period for judicial review expires without further application, the test materials will be returned to the Personnel Psychology Centre of the Public Service Commission, on request. The personal notes will be destroyed."