[21]
In considering the first submission advanced by the Minister, namely that s. 6(7)(b) is an "additional or supplementary remedy" that should not "necessarily" be made following the making of an order for production under s. 6(7)(a), it is significant to note that, prior to the enactment of s. 6(7), the court consistently ordered the Minister, and not the second person (in most cases the generic manufacturer), to produce the confidential information. In those circumstances, there was obviously never any concern in relation to the accuracy, the completeness or the currency of the information produced, given the Minister's neutral position in such matters. However, s. 6(7)(a) empowers the court to order the second person, and not the Minister, to produce the relevant portions of the confidential information filed in the submission for a notice of compliance. In the circumstances, the provision in s. 6(7)(b) was clearly intended to operate as an administrative check, designed to eliminate any questions being raised concerning the information produced, including matters such as its accuracy, completeness and currency. As such, s. 6(7)(b) was not intended to be read in isolation as an "additional or supplementary remedy", but rather was intended to constitute an integral part of every order made by the court concerning the production of confidential information. In other words, s. 6(7)(b) should not be construed as a discrete power separate from s. 6(7)(a). Indeed, when considered in its context, the sole legislative purpose of s. 6(7)(b) is to reduce unnecessary litigation by eliminating any uncertainty concerning the information produced. As such, both constituent parts of s. 6(7) are intended to reduce unnecessary litigation. Finally, the legislative amendment relieves the Minister of the more onerous burden of actually producing the information, as he was required to do under the previous jurisprudence, and replaces it with the straightforward and simple administrative task of verifying that the information produced corresponds with the information filed. That seems to be a relatively small price to pay for injecting certainty into the process, thereby reducing unnecessary litigation.