[53]
In
Slattery
, supra,
dealing with a s. 41(1)(d) based Commission decision, MacKay, J., at page 9 put it this way:
"[22] There can be no doubt that establishment and management of a process for investigating complaints made under s. 40 is within the discretion of the CHRC under its enabling legislation. In the exercise of that discretion
this court should only intervene where it is persuaded the Commission has erred in law or has acted unreasonably.
" (emphasis mine)
Later on in his decision, MacKay, J., deepened his analysis on the standard of review when he said at page 12:
"[35] For the applicant, written submissions urged that the Commission should treat a complaint in the circumstances of this or any other case, 'on the basis that the facts alleged by the complainant are true or are capable of being proven', a standard similar to that of this court in considering a motion to dismiss an action or to strike a pleading on the grounds that no cause of action is established in law. As I read the decision of the Commission, implicitly accepting the recommendation and the reasons of the investigator, that is essentially what was done in this case. It is assumed the facts alleged by the applicant in her complaint are true or capable of proof, but those 'facts' do not include her interpretation of the
CHR Act
. The decision here is that on the facts alleged, no discriminatory practice under the
Act
is established. That assessment is more than one of fact; it includes assessment of the application of the law to the facts alleged.
"[36] The determination by the Commission, in its implicit finding that the decision of the adjudicator and the conduct of the mediator did not constitute discriminatory practices under s. 14(1), ultimately concerns the jurisdiction of the Commission. In that decision, the standard for the court in an application for judicial review, in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Mossop
, supra, ... is ultimately the standard of correctness."