[1]
MacKay, J.
: In this action against Her Majesty the Queen the plaintiff's claim at the time of trial is for reimbursement, or in the alternative damages for the value of scallops in the shell returned to the sea on orders of fishery officers after his vessel and its catch were seized following the boarding of his fishing boat at sea by fishery officers who charged him with fishing in a prohibited area of the Bay of Fundy.
[2]
On August 18, 1989 at about 6:00 p.m., in fine weather, while hauling a scallop dragging gear aboard his vessel at the end of a tow, the plaintiff was ordered to stop by a fishery patrol vessel. His boat was then boarded by fishery officers who informed him he was fishing in a closed area. After a statement of his rights was read to him he was advised that his boat and its catch were seized and he was directed to sail to Digby under escort, which he did after the officers returned to their patrol vessel. That trip was about three hours in duration. When about halfway there he was asked to slow down and then told to shovel overboard any scallops still in the shell. He declined to do so until he could get an explanation in Digby why he was required to do so and he was then advised to continue under escort to Digby.
[3]
At the time his operations were stopped the plaintiff was completing his fourth day of scallop dragging in the Bay of Fundy. He had a crew of three and three others, scallop shuckers, to help shell scallops, aboard the vessel. As time permitted scallops in the shell collected by the vessel's dragging gear, were shucked, and the meat so removed was stored in ice. Scallops still in the shell were similarly stored in ice until the crew could process them. Normal practice, with a good catch, was for the vessel to return to port and to complete shucking scallops from the shells in the harbour before unloading the scallop meat at the wharf.
[4]
On arrival at the wharf in Digby two fishery officers, one or both being different from the officers aboard the patrol vessel, came aboard the plaintiff's boat. He was again read a statement of his rights and he was advised that his vessel and its catch were under seizure and that scallops still in the shell would have to be returned to the sea. The plaintiff said he wanted to process the scallops, that is to shuck the scallops, taking the meat from the shells. His request to do so was refused. The scallop meat stored in the hold was removed, under seizure, and was subsequently sold by fishery officers, some 857 pounds in all, for which the purchaser paid $3,085.20, which was retained by the Crown. With the fishery officers aboard, the plaintiff then moved his boat at their direction outside the harbour where the crew, assisted by the officers, shovelled overboard the scallops still in the shell. There were some 130 bushels of scallops in the shell returned to the sea. The vessel returned to the wharf under seizure and three days later it was released to the owner after he posted a bond.
[5]
The plaintiff was prosecuted under the
Atlantic Fisheries Regulations
for violation of the terms of his license by fishing in a closed area. He was acquitted and as a result no forfeiture order was issued in relation to the vessel or the catch seized.
[6]
When this action was initiated the plaintiff claimed damages in the amount of $6,829.20. Before trial he had been paid $3,085.20 by the defendant, the amount of the proceeds received on sale of the scallop meat seized with the vessel. Thus, outstanding at the time of trial was a claim in the amount of $3,744, an amount equal to the plaintiff's estimate of the value of 130 bushels of scallops in the shell that, on order of the fishery officers, were shovelled overboard and returned to the water outside Digby harbour. The plaintiff's estimate of the value of those scallops is not disputed, but the defendant claims there is no entitlement to reimbursement and no liability for loss claimed in relation to the value of scallops in the shell returned to the water under s. 73(4) of the
Fisheries Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14, as amended.
[7]
Relevant sections of the
Fisheries Act
provide as follows.
"71(1) A fishery officer may seize any fishing vessel, vehicle, fishing gear, implement, appliance, material, container, goods, equipment or fish where the fishery officer believes, on reasonable grounds, that
(a) the fishing vessel, vehicle, fishing gear, implement, appliance, material, container, goods or equipment has been used in connection with the commission of an offence against this Act or the Regulations;
(b) the fish or any part thereof have been caught, taken, killed, transported, bought, sold or had in possession contrary to any provision of this Act or the Regulations; or
(c) the fish or any part thereof have been intermixed with fish referred to in paragraph (b).
"71(2) Subject to this section and ss. 72 and 73, anything seized pursuant to subsection (1) shall be retained in the custody of the fishery officer making the seizure or shall be delivered into the custody of such person as the Minister directs.
"71(3) Where, in the opinion of the person having custody of any thing seized pursuant to subsection (1), the thing will rot, spoil or otherwise perish, that person may sell the thing in such manner and for such price as that person may determine.
"71(4) The proceeds of a sale referred to in subsection (3) shall be paid to the Receiver General or shall be deposited in a bank to the credit of the Receiver General.
"72(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act or the Regulations, the convicting court or judge may, in addition to any punishment imposed, order that any thing seized pursuant to subsection 71(1), or the whole or any part of the proceeds of a sale referred to in subsection 71(3), be forfeited and, on such an order being made, the thing so ordered to be forfeited is forfeited to Her Majesty in Right of Canada.
. . . . .
"72(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), where the ownership of any thing seized pursuant to subsection 71(1) cannot, at the time of the seizure, be ascertained by the fishery officer by whom the seizure is made, the thing is, on the seizure thereof, forfeited to Her Majesty.
"72(3) Where any thing has been seized pursuant to subsection 71(1) and proceedings in respect of the alleged offence have been instituted, the court or judge may, except where the thing is forfeited under subsection (2), order redelivery thereof to the accused on security by bond, with two sureties, in an amount and form satisfactory to the Minister, being given to Her Majesty or on security of a cash deposit, in an amount satisfactory to the Minister, being given to Her Majesty.
"72(4) Any thing seized pursuant to subsection 71(1) or the proceeds realized from a sale thereof under subsection 71(3), except a thing forfeited under subsection (2), shall be returned or paid to the person from whom the thing was taken if the Minister decides not to institute a prosecution in respect of the alleged offence and, in any event, shall be returned or paid on the expiration of three months from the day of the seizure unless before that time proceedings in respect of the alleged offence are instituted.
"73. ...
"73(3) Where any thing has been seized pursuant to subsection 71(1) and proceedings in respect of the offence have been instituted, but the thing or any proceeds realized from the sale thereof under subsection 71(3) is or are not, at or within 30 days after the final conclusion of the proceedings, ordered to be forfeited under subsection 72(1), and has or have not been forfeited under subsection 72(2), the thing shall be returned forthwith, or the proceeds shall be paid forthwith, to the person from whom the thing was taken, unless there has been a conviction and a fine imposed, in which case
(a) the thing may be detained until the fine is paid;
(b) the thing may be sold under execution in satisfaction of the fine; or
(c) the proceeds realized from a sale of the thing pursuant to subsection 71(3) may be applied in payment of the fine.
"73(4) Notwithstanding anything in this section or s. 71 or 72, a fishery officer may, at the time of seizure, return to the water any fish seized pursuant to subsection 71(1) that the fishery officer believes to be alive."
[8]
Section 75 provides that where anything is forfeited to Her Majesty any person, other than one convicted of an offence that results in the forfeiture or who possessed the thing when seized, who claims an interest in the thing may apply to a judge, of a court as defined in s. 74, for a declaration of his interest and that his interest is not affected by the forfeiture. Section 76 provides for an appeal by the Minister or by the person seeking a declaration but when a final order declaring the interest of a person is made the Minister shall direct that the thing be returned, or that an amount equal to the value of the interest of the applicant, as declared by the court, be paid to him.
[9]
Section 77 then provides:
"77. Sections 74 to 76 to not apply to
. . . . .
(b) any fish that have been returned to the water pursuant to s. 73(4)."
[10]
Testimony was heard at trial from the plaintiff and from Mr. R.M. Kiley, a fishery officer who boarded the vessel on its arrival at Digby, had the scallop meat removed from the hold, and ordered the scallops in the shell to be returned to the water. There was no serious dispute that the boat and its catch were declared seized by fishery officers from the patrol vessel who boarded the boat while at sea in the Bay of Fundy and then ordered the plaintiff to sail under escort to Digby. Mr. Kiley testified that, though he knew the boat was arriving under escort of a patrol vessel, he did not know what had transpired before the boat arrived in Digby when he went aboard and advised the plaintiff that the vessel and his catch were seized under the
Act
. I infer that he must have been aware that both boat and catch were considered to be under seizure from the time the plaintiff was ordered to proceed to Digby under escort. Otherwise he would not have been at the wharf to board the boat on its arrival.
[11]
The only matter on which the witnesses' testimony differed was whether the scallops in the shell, stored in ice in the boat's hold, were alive at the time they were returned to the water. The plaintiff testified as follows:
"Q.	Now, can you recall or do you have any recollection of how many of the scallops were alive or not alive in the hold of your vessel at the time that you were putting them over the side?
A.	In my mind, I would say approximately 50% each way. Some of the scallop had been in the hold for close to two to three days, in that range.
Q.	Now, these scallops that had been in your hold for two to three days, are you suggesting that they will be dead or incapable of surviving if they're put back in the water?
A.	Yes, they were.
Q.	Are they capable of being processed into -- taken out of the shell and producing a good quality product?
A.	Oh, yes. Yes."
In cross-examination concerning the basis of his estimate of live scallops, the plaintiff testified as follows.
"Q.	Okay. So, you've said that some of the seized scallops in this case, the shell stock as you call it, had been in the hold for two or three days.
A.	Yes.
Q.	How would you ascertain that? How would you know how old particular parts of what you had in the ship were?
A.	Well, they were in different sections.
Q.	Okay. So, do you keep track of the time that they're caught by section as well?
A.	Not as much -- not on paper, but in my mind. I was skipper and that was my job, to keep track of, you know, the oldest scallop and the first scallop of the catch. And like the first part of that trip, we fished off of New Brunswick in small scallop, small size scallop, and it kept us busy just putting them in the hold and catching. And the guys that were shucking, they just worked along and shucked. And then after I felt that I had a portion of my trip caught, I would go on the other shore fishing the bigger scallop."
[12]
In direct examination, Mr. Kiley, the fishery officer, testified in relation to this matter as follows.
"Q.	Okay. So, then those unshucked scallops were dumped overboard?
A.	Yes, they were.
Q.	Okay. And you were involved in that dumping?
A.	Yes, I was.
Q.	What did you believe to be the state of those scallops at that time in relation to whether or not they were alive or dead?
A.	I believe they were alive.
. . . . .
Q.	Mr. Kiley, why do you say you believed those fish to be alive, those scallops to be alive?
A.	Well, they appeared to be alive. Some of them, they open up and, if you touch them and that, they'll close right up solid. So, things like that. There's movement in them, in the scallops. You know, you can actually, you know, hear them moving a bit, because there's so many of them, right? They'll be opening and closing.
Q.	And how many years have you been dealing with live scallops?
A.	Since 1978, pretty well.
Q.	Okay. So, in your experience, then, those particular scallops looked to be alive?
A.	The vast majority of them would appear to be alive to me, yes.
Q.	Okay.
A.	I believe, on the Violation Report that I filed, it says that there were live shucks, or live shell stock that was put back in the water."
In cross-examination Mr. Kiley testified as follows.
"Q.	Now, you heard Captain Longmire testify as to the state of the scallops. I think he indicated that about half would have been alive and about half dead. What do you know about scallop mortalities when they're returned to the water after a given number of days or hours out of the water?
A.	Not very much that I could explain.
Q.	For instance, a scallop may be alive, so to speak on a vessel so that it shows some life, the shall may close. But do you know whether or not that same scallop is going to live if it's returned to the water or whether it's already been perhaps injured to the point where it's going to die?
A.	The only thing that I can say to that, Mr. Hood, is that if I didn't return it to the water, that it would have no chance."
[13]
I find on this evidence, in light of his experience, the fishery officer believed, on reasonable grounds, that the vast majority of the shell scallops were alive when they were returned to the water. Those grounds were essentially related to his experience over some 14 years in dealing with the scallop fishery, and essentially they were his observation of the scallops and his hearing their movement in opening and closing of their shells. Moreover, it seems reasonable that, if the processing of fish aboard the vessel was done on a "first in, first out" basis, as the plaintiff implied, relatively few of the scallops in the shell would have been two or three days aboard the boat, retained in ice in the hold. There was no evidence of the time that a scallop would remain alive under such conditions, or of how long after its death meat removed from the shell would still be of marketable quality. I assume the latter time period is minimal and I conclude there is no basis established to question the belief of Mr. Kiley. While there was limited questioning of the witnesses concerning the likelihood of survival of scallops returned to the water some hours or days after they were brought aboard a vessel it seems to me nothing here turns on that factor.
[14]
The plaintiff's claim ultimately depends upon the interpretation and the application to the circumstances of this case of s. 73(4) of the
Act
. That section I repeat here for convenience.
"73(4) Notwithstanding anything in this section or s. 71 or 72, a fishery officer may, at the time of seizure, return to the water any fish seized pursuant to subsection 71(1) that the fishery officer believes to be alive."
[15]
The plaintiff acknowledges that under this provision, discretion is vested in a fishery officer to order that fish be returned to the water, but only in circumstances where the fish are alive and the order to return them to the water is made at the time of seizure. It is urged that the fishery officer in this case, Mr. Kiley, did not act within the authority under s. 73(4) because he did not ascertain whether or not all the scallops were alive and because the order was made not at the time of seizure but more than three hours later when the plaintiff's boat arrived at the wharf in Digby. On the first of these objections I am satisfied that the officer believed, on reasonable grounds, that at the time the scallops were returned to the water they were alive.
[16]
I am, however, persuaded that there is merit to the plaintiff's second objection, that the fishery officer did not act within the authority vested under s. 73(4) since the scallops were not returned to the water at the time of the seizure, as that subsection expressly provides. Here the plaintiff was advised at sea by fishery officers from the patrol vessel that his boat and its catch were under seizure. He was not ordered at that time to return scallops in the shell to the water. It is true that when about halfway to Digby under escort he was ordered to slow or to stop and then directed by fishery officers from the escorting patrol vessel to return scallops in the shell to the water, but when he protested and said he wanted an explanation of such directions after they would arrive in Digby, the direction was not then insisted upon and he was ordered to continue to Digby under escort. Only after arrival at the wharf was he ordered again, this time by Mr. Kiley, to return the shell scallops to the water, some three hours or more after his boat and its catch had been under seizure. They were returned to the water in the Annapolis Basin, outside Digby harbour, not in the closed area where his boat and its catch were said to be seized.
[17]
My conclusion is based upon a strict interpretation of the words of s. 73(4). In my view, that is the appropriate construction of those words in light of the purpose of that provision in the context of the statute. Section 71 of the
Act
provides for seizure of boats, gear and fish in circumstances where it appears to fishery officers that a fisherman has acted in contravention of the
Act
or the
Regulations
. Under s. 71(2), (3) and (4) the
Act
requires, subject to ss. 72 and 73, that any thing seized be retained in custody, unless the thing seized is perishable in which event it may be sold with the proceeds of the sale paid to the Receiver General. Section 72 provides for forfeiture of those things seized only in two circumstances. One of those, under s. 72(2), where ownership of the thing seized cannot, at the time of seizure, be ascertained, is not relevant here. The only other provision for forfeiture under s. 72(1) is where a court orders forfeiture, following conviction of an offence under the
Act
or
Regulations
. Under s. 72(3), where a prosecution has been instituted any thing seized and not forfeited to the Crown under s. 72(2) may be released upon security posted by a satisfactory bond. Section 72(4) provides for return of any thing seized, or the proceeds of any sale of seized goods, if the Minister decides not to prosecute in relation to an alleged offence, or in any event three months after seizure unless a prosecution has been instituted.
[18]
In this case there was no conviction and no order of forfeiture. The plaintiff was thus entitled to the return of the things seized or the proceeds from their sale pursuant to s. 73(3). That provision directs that, in the circumstances here, the goods seized and not ordered forfeited, or the proceeds of any sale, be returned to the person from whom they were taken.
[19]
Under s. 73(1) the Crown may dispose of goods forfeited after 30 days, or immediately upon forfeiture in the case of lobster traps under s. 73(2). Where goods are seized and a prosecution instituted, s. 73(3) provides that if no order of forfeiture is made within 30 days of conclusion of the proceedings, the goods or the proceeds of their sale shall be returned to the person from whom they were taken, unless there has been a conviction and a fine imposed, in which event the seized goods or the proceeds from their sale may be applied in satisfaction of the fine if it is not paid. That provision makes clear that in a case such as this, where the plaintiff was acquitted of the offence charged, he is entitled to the return of his goods, forthwith, as the provision requires.
[20]
Even when goods have been forfeited to Her Majesty, ss. 75 and 76 provide an opportunity for a person, other than one convicted of the offence which resulted in the seizure or one in whose possession the goods were when seized, to apply to a court for a declaration of an interest in the goods and to have that interest recognized, with return of the goods or the proceeds of any sale, except under s. 77 where, inter alia, fish have been returned to the water pursuant to s. 73(4).
[21]
These provisions and the process established by them, reflect the concern of Parliament to balance the general public interest in conservation of fisheries, an underlying purpose of the
Act
, and the interest of the individual from whom goods are seized or anyone else interested in the equipment and the catch where those have been forfeited to the Crown. Thus, when it appears to a fishery officer that fishing is unlawful, or some other violation of the
Act
and
Regulations
has occurred, he may exercise the extraordinary discretion to seize a boat, its gear and fish caught but he then has the responsibility to maintain goods seized in custody, unless they are perishable, and to return them, or if perishable and sold, to see to the return of their proceeds, if there is no conviction and no order of forfeiture. Seizure in itself does not vest in the Crown any interest in the goods seized, except where the officer cannot determine the owner at the time goods are seized. In all other cases there is no forfeiture to the Crown without a court order following a conviction. And as we have seen, even after forfeiture, a person other than one convicted or from whom the goods are seized, may apply to a court for an order concerning an interest claimed in the goods forfeited.
[22]
The processes provided in ss. 71 to 77 demonstrate concern for the interests of those who have a claim to goods that are seized. In the context of those provisions, s. 73(4) seems quite extraordinary in authorizing a fishery officer to require disposal of live fish, once they are seized, by returning them to the water, at the time of seizure, even though at that stage there is no determination that the person from whom they are seized has committed an offence. The purpose of that subsection must surely be conservation and preservation, not merely of a species in general terms but of the fish actually found live in possession of one who is considered to have committed an offence under the
Act
or
Regulations
. Otherwise there would have been no need to specify that return to the water of fish believed to be alive is to be done at the time of seizure.
[23]
Sections 71 to 77 of the
Act
reflect the long tradition in our legal system, sometimes said to be traceable through the
Bill of Rights
of 1688 and the
Petition of Right
of 1627 in England, to
Magna Charta
, that seizure by the Crown and disposal of the property of a citizen without compensation has not been accepted or recognized by the courts, unless Parliament in its wisdom expressly provides for that. Here Parliament has expressly so provided under s. 77 so that where fish have been returned to the water in accord with s. 73(4) a person may not obtain a declaration of interest in the fish. Similarly, an exemption from any claim to fish returned to the water in accord with s. 73(4) is effected by the opening words of the subsection, "Notwithstanding anything in this section or ss. 71 and 72 ...", which preclude any claim to recover under s. 73(3) for any live fish returned to the water at the time of seizure, even if there be no conviction for an offence.
[24]
In my view a strict construction of s. 73(4) is appropriate in view of the purpose of the provision as I construe it, and in view of the extraordinary discretion it vests in a fishery officer to seize and dispose of property of a citizen, i.e., fish believed to be alive, before any conviction for an offence charged and without compensation.
[25]
In this case, the boat and its catch were under seizure from the time fishery officers boarded the boat at sea, and only three hours later were the shell scallops definitively ordered to be returned to the water. They were so returned but at a time more than three hours after seizure was effected. In these circumstances, since they were returned to the water not at the time of seizure, but somewhat later, the fishery officer was not acting in accord with s. 73(4). The requirement of returning the scallops to the water was not authorized under that provision. The plaintiff, not convicted of any offence that resulted in the seizure, is entitled to return of the goods, fish, seized, including the shell scallops, and the proceeds of sale of the scallop meat, pursuant to s. 73(3). Since the shell scallops cannot be returned, in my view he is entitled to their value, here not disputed, in the amount of $3,744. Otherwise, by action of the Crown's officers, he would be deprived of property without compensation, in circumstances not expressly provided by Parliament.
[26]
It was urged for the defendant that there was no tort or wrong committed by the fishery officers, in light of the discretion vested in them, unless it is established, which it is not, that they acted in bad faith. That defence is based on the assumption they acted within their discretion under the statute, which I find is not the case. In the result, by seizure and disposal of the plaintiff's property, the scallops in the shell, in circumstances not authorized by Parliament, their action resulted in the wrong or tort of conversion, for which the plaintiff is entitled to recover the full value of the scallops in the shell. (See
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED) Only in circumstances where return of live fish to the water is done at the time of seizure is the act authorized by Parliament, and not a wrong, for which, in any other circumstances, the person from whom the seizure is made would be entitled to recover the fish or their value.
[27]
In case my interpretation of s. 73(4) should not ultimately be upheld, I turn to the second basis on which the plaintiff urged he was here entitled to recover the value of the scallops returned to the sea after they were seized. It is said that even if the officer here acted within the discretion authorized by legislation, in the manner of that exercise he owed a duty to the plaintiff to act fairly. Reliance was placed upon
Regina v. McRae
(1980), 54 C.C.C.(2d) 521 (B.C.S.C.), where Wallace, J., found that what is now s. 71(3), authorizing sale of seized goods which are perishable "for such price as that person [i.e. the one having custody of seized goods] may determine", did not delegate unrestricted discretion, but rather the duty of fairness owed by the seizing officer would require every reasonable effort to obtain as close to the market price as possible. In that case a written departmental policy which provided that disposal of seized "Indian food fish" should be turned over to charitable organizations serving the Indian community, or distributed to the elderly or handicapped or needy persons on a reserve, was found to be a direction contrary to the duty of fairness owed to the person from whom fish was seized. Acting under that policy was not within discretion within the statutory provision authorizing sale, which discretion was subject to a duty of fairness owed to the person from who fish were seized. The plaintiff urges that the same general principle, applying the duty of fairness, should be extended to this case.
[28]
I am not persuaded that the fishery officer, if he was acting within discretion authorized by s. 73(4), can be said to have breached a duty of fairness owed to the plaintiff. There is no evidence the officer acted in bad faith. The plaintiff concedes that, unlike the situation in
McRae
, there was no written departmental policy directing the exercise of discretion in returning live fish to the water. Thus, no argument of fettering discretion was here advanced. It was suggested that the individual fishery officer concerned, Mr. Kiley, had his own standard policy to return live scallops to the water where they were seized for fishing in closed waters, and it was suggested by the plaintiff, on the basis of hearsay, that not all fishery officers did this. He believed on some occasions, seized scallops in the shell were shucked as he had wanted to do, or on other occasions, shell scallops that had been seized were sold to buyers who then arranged for them to be shucked ashore. Mr. Kiley, in cross-examination, recalled an occasion, though he did not remember the details, when he had agreed that seized scallops be shucked and he had not insisted on returning them to the water. Even if those other occasions were established by evidence they would not establish that in this case, Mr. Kiley did not exercise his discretion properly. The plaintiff asked to shuck the scallops rather than return them to the water so, even though he was refused, in my view it cannot be said that Mr. Kiley did not consider that possibility. It was suggested by counsel for the plaintiff that one could infer that no consideration was given to the course of action proposed by the plaintiff, on the basis of Mr. Kiley's evidence in pretrial cross-examination. I am not persuaded that this inference should be drawn, rather that testimony indicates there were reasons why Mr. Kiley, from his experience, ordered the shell scallops to be returned to the water in this case.
[29]
Essentially, the argument that the fishery officer breached a duty of fairness owed to the plaintiff seeks to establish that he ought to have permitted the plaintiff's request to shuck the scallops from their shells, or that he made the wrong decision. It seems to me that argument denies the very discretion that it is conceded, for purposes of this argument, was vested in him for it implies that in the circumstances only one course of action, that desired by the plaintiff, was open to the officer.
[30]
In my view, if I am wrong in finding that Mr. Kiley did not act within the limited discretion vested by s. 73(4), and if his action was authorized within the limits of that discretion, it cannot be said on the basis of the evidence here presented that he violated any duty of fairness owed to the plaintiff in ordering the return of shell scallops to the water.
[31]
In written submissions for the plaintiff it was also submitted that officer Kiley's actions violated ss. 8 and 11(d) of the
Charter
. Those submissions were not available to counsel for the defendant sufficiently in advance of trial to be dealt with, and it was agreed that they would not be addressed by counsel, unless after consideration of the evidence and other arguments advanced, the court found it necessary to deal with
Charter
issues to resolve the matter. If that proved to be the case counsel were to be given opportunity to fully address those issues. Since I have concluded the matter without considering
Charter
issues, there has been no need to invite argument upon them.
Conclusion
[32]
In the result, for the reasons outlined, I find that the plaintiff is entitled to recover the value of shell scallops seized and later returned to the water on order of a fishery officer who was not acting within the authority delegated by s. 73(4) of the
Act
. There is no dispute as to the value of those scallops, which I fix at $3,744.
[33]
Thus, an order goes allowing the plaintiff's action and directing payment to him in the amount of $3,744. He is also to recover costs of the action, on the normal party and party basis.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/sms
[End of document]
