[7]
The Appeal Division's board member summarized the facts in her findings at page 5 of the decision:
"The following are my findings in relation to the evidence adduced in this appeal.
"The appellant, now 68 years of age, was previously married and has six children between 32 and 42 years of age. He remarried in 1986, his new wife being 37 years of age. The appellant is retired, has a big house and time to spend with more children. The last of his biological children left the family home in 1994.
"Mrs. Zhao testified to a desire to have her own biological child. The appellant and his wife considered adoption in 1989 after Mrs. Zhao had a miscarriage. She was by this time 40 years of age. In explanation for their delay before adopting in 1994, Mrs. Zhao stated that between 1989 and 1994, she was still hoping to get pregnant.
"Both the appellant and Mrs. Zhao testified that the purpose of the adoption was to bring a child into their home. A late marriage, followed by a miscarriage and failure to conceive over a five-year period culminated in this adoption. I am satisfied that Mrs. Zhao wants genuinely to have her own child, and Mr. Zhou [sic] is happy to agree. Yet I note that it was the natural parents who initiated the proposed adoption. According to the appellant, the natural parents proposed the adoption in 1992, while Mrs. Zhao stated that this proposal was made in 1988. She remembered this as being one year after the natural parents had their third child. Further, the Applicant testified it was best for her to come to Canada as her parents are poor and 'cannot give her things.' I find that the natural parents' primary motivation was to gain the Applicant's admission to Canada.
"The appellant's evidence was that both the natural and adoptive parents appreciated that the adoption would benefit the natural parents. They are governed by the one-child policy in China. While the natural parents have three children, one born in each of 1984, 1985 and 1987, the evidence was that it is only the first child who is eligible for educational and other state--provided benefits. The testimony was that a penalty or fee is assessed by the state for the second and third child, who can then be raised by the natural parents at their own cost. The evidence proved that the adoptive parents send money to the natural parents for payment of this penalty or fee for the natural parents' children - not the Applicant.
"Whether the natural parents benefit from this adoption in relation to the one-child policy is not clear to me. The second and third child violated the one-child policy, and required payment of fees and expenditures not provided by the state. Yet it was the eldest or first-born child who was adopted because, according to Mrs. Zhao, she knew the girl before she departed for Canada. There was no evidence that the benefits bestowed upon the firstborn would flow to the second-born. Nor was there evidence of whether the appellant and his wife would continue to provide funds to the Applicant's natural family in connection with their breach of the one--child policy. Thus I find that the evidence does not prove, on a balance of probabilities, that any specific economic benefit accrues to the natural parents in relation to the one-child policy as a result of the adoption, but am satisfied that it proves that the Applicant will be afforded an improved lifestyle as a result of the financial status of the adoptive parents. Further, I find that the evidence is consistent with the purpose of the natural parents being to provide their eldest child with a better future by gaining her admission to Canada.
"I find that the motives of the natural parents are to ensure a better future for their eldest child by gaining her admission to Canada. Yet I also find that this is only one purpose, as I find there is credible evidence to prove that the appellant and Mrs. Zhao wanted to bring a child into their home to create a second family. As a result they adopted the Applicant in 1994, when she was ten years of age and who would by virtue of her age require parenting. However, these findings must he considered in light of all the evidence adduced.
"Beyond the question of the purpose of the adoption is the issue of whether the evidence proves on a balance of probabilities that the adoption creates a genuine relationship of parent and child. I find that the evidence proves, on a balance of probabilities, that such a relationship has not been created. The child's name was not changed, nor was the fact of the adoption generally known outside the Applicant's natural family because, according to the testimony of the Applicant, people 'tended to gossip.' I find this explanation unsatisfactory, in particular as there was no indication of how or why such 'gossip' would be problematic. I also find that the evidence proves, on a balance of probabilities, that there was no change in the parental authority from the natural to the adoptive parents. I find that the only influence exerted by the appellant on the natural parents or the Applicant is related to the money provided by him, which is intended to benefit the family as a whole and not the Applicant alone. I note, too, that the Applicant continues to refer to the appellant and his wife as her 'uncle' and 'aunt'. I find that the evidence proves that the Applicant continues to regard her natural parents as her authority and parental figures. The evidence of the witnesses was that the Applicant would not be considered the child of the appellant and Mrs. Zhao until the girl arrives in Canada, which is when a parent and child relationship would commence.
"I find this evidence inconsistent with the adoption creating a genuine relationship of parent and child. I concur with the Appeal Division jurisprudence that the definition of 'adopted' requires that the relationship of parent and child commence at the time of adoption, geographic separation notwithstanding. I find that the relationship is not expected to be fully developed, being described in
Cansino
as 'inchoate'. In this case, the adoption commenced in 1994, but the appellant and his wife have taken no parental authority or responsibility for the Applicant. Their continued contribution is financial, which is insufficient to prove a parental relationship. The lack of development of a parent and child relationship is not explained by the evidence, even considering the geographic separation. It is not sufficient to say that after the child comes to Canada a parent-child relationship will commence.
"Based on the forgoing [sic], I find that a purpose of the adoption is to gain the Applicant's admission to Canada, and also find that the evidence does not prove that the adoption creates a genuine relationship of parent and child.
"This appeal is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction."
4. Issues
a. Did the Board err by refusing to rule on the visa officer's alleged errors of law?
b. Did the Board err by failing to advert to the purposes of the legislation?
c. Did the Board err in interpreting the definition of adopted?
d. Did the Board err in evaluating the genuineness of the relationship?
e. Did the Board err by failing to consider the best interests of the child?
5. Refusal to Rule on the Visa Officer's Alleged Errors of Law
Applicant's Submissions