[4]
Justice MacKay made it abundantly clear that in his view he could make no finding that Mr. Oberlander was directly involved in any war crimes and that, in addition, he was not involved as an accomplice in the criminal law sense with any such crimes:
"10. The purpose of this proceeding is to determine whether or not, as set out in the Notice of Reference, 'the Respondent was admitted to Canada for permanent residence and obtained Canadian citizenship by false representations or by fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances'. That determination, when made, is one of fact, based on the evidence adduced in this reference. It is not subject to appeal.
"11. The applicant does allege, as the basis for her concern, in the Notice of Revocation, that material circumstances were concealed by the respondent's failure 'to divulge to Canadian immigration and citizenship officials your membership in the German Sicherheitspolizei und SD and Einsatzkommando 10 A during the Second World War and your participation in the executions of civilians during that period of time'. The portion of that allegation concerning the respondent's 'participation in the execution of civilians', is not reflected in any of the facts alleged in the Minister's Summary of Facts and Evidence.
"12. That Summary, which must be taken to include all of the facts the applicant hopes to establish by evidence in this case, does not include any reference to personal commission by the respondent of atrocities or war crimes or his personal involvement in 'the execution of civilians' or in criminal activities. Nor does it include any reference to his involvement in aiding and abetting others in the commission of criminal activities, in any sense comparable to 'aiding and abetting' as those terms are used in s. 21 of the
Criminal Code for Canada
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. Thus, in my view the Minister does not seek to establish by evidence that Mr. Oberlander was personally involved in the commission of atrocities or war crimes or criminal activities, or in aiding and abetting, in any criminal sense, others engaged in criminal activities. I affirm for the record that no evidence was presented to the Court about any personal involvement of the respondent in criminal activities or war crimes.
"13. The Minister's Summary of Facts and Evidence does include reference to allegations that the respondent joined the Sicherheitspolizei and SD and Einsatzkommando 10A ('Ek 10a') in or about October 1941, that he served with it in German-occupied eastern territories from 1941 to 1943 or 1944, and during that time the unit he served with was involved in criminal killing of civilians. This is the basis of the Minister's concern about false representation, or fraud or failing to disclose material circumstances, that is, Mr. Oberlander's association with a certain German police unit that participated in criminal killing of civilians in World War II. That association is specified as 'membership', in the Notice of Revocation and as repeated in the Minister's Summary of Facts and Evidence, in S.S. organizations and in a unit, Ek 10a, known to have been engaged in criminal killing activity." (Footnotes omitted)