[9]
The following comments by Justice Décary on the relationship of Justice MacKay's findings and the Minister's report, including Mr. Oberlander's written submissions, to the Governor in Council and the latter's decision which was then under review are of particular importance to us here:
"40. Neither the Report nor the written submissions are meant to question the findings of facts made by the Judge at the end of the reference process. These findings are final and non-reviewable (see subs. 18(3) of the
Act
). To the extent that the written submissions were a disguised collateral attack against the findings, they were irrelevant and unhelpful. In the case at bar, Mr. Oberlander, the Minister and the Governor in Council must accept as an indisputable fact that Mr. Oberlander had a wartime experience with EK 10a, that he falsely represented his background or knowingly concealed material circumstances when interviewed by a security officer and that he was admitted to Canada for permanent residence and eventually was granted citizenship by false representation (see MacKay, J.'s, reasons at para. 210). That the Governor in Council has the power, under section 18 of the
Citizenship
Act
, to revoke Mr. Oberlander's citizenship is a given, the only question is: was the power to revoke exercised by the Governor in Council in a reviewable way in the circumstances of this case?
"41. The findings of fact, however, must be seen as they are and not as they might have been. Mr. Justice MacKay was not deciding whether Mr. Oberlander came within the ambit of the government's policy to revoke the citizenship of war criminals. Mr. Justice MacKay was not deciding whether Mr. Oberlander was a war criminal within the meaning of Canadian or international law. Mr. Justice MacKay did not find -- as he might have -- that the EK 10a was an organization with a single, brutal purpose. Mr. Justice MacKay found that no evidence was presented about any personal involvement of Mr. Oberlander in criminal activities or in war crimes.
"42. The Attorney General of Canada acknowledged, in his factum and at the hearing, that '[w]hen considering a report by the Minister to revoke a person's citizenship, the Governor in Council must be satisfied that the statutory criteria for revocation have been met. In addition, the Governor in Council may engage in a delicate balancing of the individual's personal interests, the public interest, as well as a consideration of any relevant program policy objectives' (para. 60). I assume, for the purposes of this appeal, that this acknowledgment is well-founded. The Minister herself had acknowledged in her Report, at p. 41, that '[i]n deciding whether to revoke citizenship, the Governor in Council should consider the government's "no safe haven policy", the findings of the Trial Judge in the reference and any submissions made by Mr. Oberlander.'
"43. The statutory criteria, here, have been met. It is the balancing of interests which, it is argued by Mr. Oberlander, has either not occurred or, if it did occur, has been done in such a way as to be unreasonable."