[154]
Then, after disposing of the preliminary issue of mootness which had been raised by the Respondent, Justice Décary examined the legislative history of and the parliamentary debates relating to paragraph 5(2)(b) of the
1977 Citizenship Act
and made the following observations at paragraphs 19-22, 28, 30:
"Paragraph 5(2)(b) was specifically introduced into the
Citizenship Act of 1976
to eliminate the discriminatory policy against women that flowed from the former
Act
, under which the child of a married Canadian woman born outside Canada could not acquire citizenship through her. In proposing the second reading of Bill C-20 which was finally enacted as the
Citizenship Act
,
the then Secretary of State, the Honourable James Faulkner, remarked that the new Bill was meant to correct 'five very important ways in which the present
Citizenship Act
discriminates against women'. These ways had been pointed out in the Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women in Canada [at page 364] (
House of Commons Debates
, May 21, 1975, at page 5984) which had, in particular, recommended that sections 4 and 5 of the
Act
be amended 'to provide that a child born outside Canada is a natural-born Canadian if either of his parents is a Canadian citizen
'.
"After receiving second reading Bill C-20 was referred to the Standing Committee on Broadcasting, Films and Assistance to the Arts for consideration.
In the course of that Committee's deliberations, the fact that Bill C-20 made no provision allowing children born outside of Canada to Canadian women before February 15, 1977 to acquire citizenship was the subject of much debate and concern
. The addition of paragraphs 5(2)(a) and (b) was therefore proposed for the purpose of treating in the same way 'those who happen to be born after the
Act
comes into place' and 'those who are alive now and who have been affected adversely by the previous legislation' (Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Standing Committee on Broadcasting, Films and Assistance to the Arts, Issue 36, February 27, 1976, 39:6-7).
"Bill C-20, with the amendments recommended by the Standing Committee, including that to subsection 5(2), received third reading in the House of Commons on April 13, 1976. Bill C-20 then came into force as of February 15, 1977 as the
Citizenship Act
, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 108.
"The foregoing demonstrates that the legislator intended that anyone born to a Canadian mother at any time prior to the enactment of the
Act
and who had been adversely affected by the former
Act's
discriminatory provisions was to be entitled to receive citizenship under subsection 5(2). Whether that intent was carried into the wording used by Parliament is what remains to be seen.
. . . . .
"Paragraph 3(1)(c), which appears in Part I, confers the right to citizenship on a person who 'has been granted or acquired citizenship pursuant to section 5 or 11.' As section 11 is found in Part III, one can hardly suggest that Part I is exclusive of Part III. Further, Jason's brother, Byron, who had ceased to be a citizen before February 15, 1977 for the same reason as Jason, was nevertheless granted citizenship by the Minister under paragraph 5(2)(a).
The Minister can simply not now argue that Part I, where paragraph 5(2)(a) appears, only applies to persons who have never been citizens. It would be absurd, absent a formal text to the contrary, to suggest that two brothers born out of the country prior to the coming into force of the
Act
and having the same status under the former
Act
are subject to a different treatment under the new
Act
. It would also be absurd to suggest that the paragraph 5(2)(b) application process is accorded to a person born outside Canada whose mother was Canadian and whose father was not Canadian at the time of the birth (see
Benner v. Canada (Secretary of State)
, supra), but is denied to a person born outside Canada whose mother was Canadian and whose father was also Canadian at the time of birth
.
. . . . .
"When read altogether, these provisions lead to the inescapable conclusion that all children born outside Canada to a Canadian father or to a Canadian mother prior to the coming into force of the
1976 Act
have the right to citizenship under Part I of that
Act
." (Emphasis added)