[211]
For instance, prior to the Civil War, many American nationals, slaves in particular, were not citizens. Slavery has been abolished in America and it would be inconceivable today to deny citizenship status to Afro-Americans on the ground that their ancestors in the nineteen century were not citizens themselves. Let's nevertheless imagine the following fictitious scenario:
(a) An old citizenship statute provides that all "free men" born in this country are citizens of this state. Therefore, slaves and women are not citizens. The statute is discriminatory both on the grounds of gender and civil status of the person at the time of birth. Moreover, it excludes all black slaves based on their race.
(b) Thirty years later, the statute is amended to provide that all "free men and
women
" born in this country are citizens. In passing I note that the amending statute now gives a different legal qualification under the law to a continuing condition (being a woman) and an isolated event (being born free) which taken together did not previously confer citizenship status in the past. It can also be argued the presumption against retroactivity would prevent the "free women" born in this country before the coming into force of the amending statute from claiming that they were "citizens" since the date of their birth, and accordingly, that they were entitled prior to the coming into force of the amending statute to benefit from all the privileges and advantages of citizenship.
(c) Another 30 years later, the same statute is repealed and replaced by another statute which now provides that all persons born in this country after the coming into force of the new statute are citizens of this country. The new statute also contains a further provision to the effect that persons who were citizens
immediately
before its coming into force are citizens of this country. It might be argued that "age" is not an analogous ground of discrimination because the transitory provision in the new statute applies irrespective of the age a person has at the time of the coming into force of the new statute. The requirement imposed by the new statute for persons who were born before the coming into force of the new statute, is simply that they have to be citizens at that date. However, after 60 years, there may still be a group of black men and women living in this country who were not born as "free men and women". This group did not have any citizenship rights under the old statute. Therefore, they continue to be denied citizenship status and are not natural-born citizens of this country. Accordingly, under the new statute, they would have no right to obtain a certificate of citizenship.