 [3] 
  On July 17, 1991, the applicant attempted to have the decision of September 14, 1987 amended or rescinded as a result of the submission of new facts, as contemplated by s. 84(2) of the  
 Act 
 . By letter dated October 29, 1991, the Minister of National Health and Welfare (herein "the Minister") advised the applicant that "after reviewing this information our disability adjudication staff has determined that the previous decision remains unchanged". Applicant then made an application under s. 81 of the  
 Act 
  to have the matter reconsidered by the Minister. By letter dated January 15, 1992, signed by Mr. Gascon, an appeals officer with the Appeals and Controls Programs, applicant was advised as follows: 
 
 
 
 "I should first explain that under s. 84(2) of the Canada Pension Plan, a decision made under this  
 Act 
  may be amended only on the basis of new facts; that is, new information that was not available at the time the decision was made. 
 
 
 
 "A review under s. 84(2), however, is not an issue that can be appealed further, since any decision made under the Plan may be changed provided new facts are presented. In view of the circumstances, you will understand why your notice of appeal under s. 81 of the legislation cannot be considered with respect to your request for a review under s. 84(2). 
 
 
 
 "The medical advisers in the Disability Operations Division have reviewed all the information on Mrs. Peplinsky's file and have concluded that no new facts were made available to warrant the reopening of Mrs. Peplinski's case. The evidence available now, and at the time of her application in April, 1987, still does not indicate that Mrs. Peplinski was disabled within the meaning of the legislation at the time of the initial decision in September, 1987. Therefore, since the 1987 decision cannot be reopened on the basis of the evidence available, and the prescribed period of time to appeal the 1987 decision to the Minister has expired, I regret to advise that no further consideration can be given to Mrs. Peplinski's eligibility for disability benefits under the Canada Pension Plan."