[41]
The plaintiffs argue that, in any event, they unknowingly sent the defendants a cease and desist letter on June 23, 1987, demanding that it not infringe the patent. It is argued that this covers not only the Stradellina bag to which it is specifically addressed, but the "Ultimate" and the "Organizer" as well. That letter reads as follows:
"
VIA COURIER
Holiday Luggage Mfg. Co. Inc.
4875 des Grandes Prairies
Montreal, Quebec
Re: Infringement of Canadian Patent 1,222,724
Gentlemen:
Your attention is respectfully directed to the subject patent. A copy of the text and drawings of this patent, which issued on June 9, 1987 to Samsonite Corporation, is enclosed for your convenience.
It is our understanding that your company is currently marketing a line of garment bags in Canada, designated 'Stradellina'.
It is clear from our examination of a sample of your garment bag that your making, using or selling of this garment bag infringes the subject patent. This letter is to formally notify you, your agents, employees and representatives that you must immediately cease and desist from any further manufacture, sale, use or offering for sale of products which infringe the subject patent.
It is hereby demanded that, within ten (10) days from the date of this letter, you provide me with written confirmation that you will no longer make, use or sell or offer for sale these garment bags, or any other products which infringe the subject patent.
If you fail to comply with the foregoing by the above dealine, we will be forced to seek immediate and complete legal redress against you.
It is our sincere belief that upon careful consideration of the foregoing you will comply with this letter.
Very truly yours,
Gregory W. O'Connor
Patent Counsel"
Counsel for the plaintiffs argues that the phrase "or any other products which infringe the subject patent" is a demand which the defendant should have known covered both the "Ultimate" and the "Organizer" bags. If these two garment bags were in fact infringements of the plaintiffs' patent, I think the letter could be construed as warning the defendant in a general way not to market them. But the letter, of course, cannot be construed as specifically related to the "Ultimate" and "Organizer" bags.
Status Quo