[45]
The defendant sought to introduce both the Canadian and the United States file wrappers. Counsel for the plaintiffs objected to the admission of this evidence. In Eli Lilly & Company and Thomas Engineering Limited v. O'Hara Manufacturing Limited (Court file number T-1759-83, decision dated February 24, 1988 [18 F.T.R. 199]) my colleague Mr. Justice Pinard at pages 38-39 [of his reasons for judgment], dealt with the admissibility of such documents:
"... the remaining issue concerns the admissibility of evidence of U.S. patent application files or documents or correspondence related thereto. In the present case, we are concerned with three U.S. patent applications relating to Mr. Van B. Hostetler's invention and correspondence related thereto. In the present case, we are concerned with three U.S. patent applications relating to Mr. Van B. Hostetler's invention and correspondence related thereto. Without having to decide if some of those documents were properly filed in evidence, I maintain the plaintiff's objections to their admissibility. Indeed, I consider that there is no basis in Canadian law whereby a Canadian or foreign patent application file relating to the patent in issue can be admitted into evidence,
for the purpose of limiting the construction put on the clauses, or establishing misrepresentation or otherwise
. (underlining added)
"In Lovell Manufacturing Company et al. v. Beatty Bros. Limited (1962), 23 Fox Pat. C. 112, Thorson, P., stated, at page 132:
'It would, therefore, be contrary to fundamental principles to allow the defendant to use statements made by the plaintiff's patent agent whether in the course of its prosecutions of its applications for its United States patents or, for that matter, in the course of its prosecution of its applications for the patents in suit
for the purpose of restricting the meaning of the words of the claims in suit and limiting the ambit of the invention defined in them
. And, since the prime purpose of counsel for the defendant in tendering the United States and Canadian file wrappers was to use statements said to be contained in them for the purpose submitted their admission for such purpose would be contrary to fundamental principles. I have no hesitation, therefore, in ruling that they were inadmissible.' (underlining added)
...
"Finally, my colleague Strayer, J., in Amfac Foods Inc. et al. v. Irving Pulp & Paper Ltd. (1984), 80 C.P. R.(2d) 59, stated, at pages 86 and 87:
'At the close of their case the defendants sought to put in certain questions and answers and exhibits from the examination for discovery of Francis R. Saunders, the representative of Amfac for the purposes of examination for discovery ... These questions and exhibits related to the prosecution of the applications for the Canadian patent and the equivalent U.S. patent. Counsel for the plaintiffs took the position that such material should not be admitted. After due consideration I ruled
that such materials were not admissible
. I came to this conclusion on the basis
that the construction of a patent is a matter of law
and must be based on the patent document itself, subject to the usual assistance of evidence concerning the meaning of technical terms, etc. ... In this case the apparent purpose of the introduction of these materials was to show that the plaintiffs were estopped from denying that certain features of the patent were its essential elements because of statements made with the authority of the plaintiff Amfac during the course of the prosecution of the patent applications. ...'" (underlining added)