[12]
The Respondent replied to this letter by letter dated November 6, 2000 and provided answers to the specific questions raised in the correspondence from the Commission. The Respondent repeated its position that allowing the complaint to proceed would be prejudicial to it. Among other things, it stated that some witnesses were unavailable since the persons involved in the interview with the Applicant and Mr. Love were no longer employed by the Respondent. Furthermore, the Respondent said that it would be prejudiced if required to investigate an event that had occurred more than three years before:
"Question: Are witnesses still available? If not, why?
Answer: No. The employees who were involved in the decision to hire Steve Love are no longer employed by Concord Transportation Inc.
Question: What efforts have been made to find witnesses?
Answer: Efforts have not been made to find these former employees to date.
Question: What harm could be caused by the delay? Explain in details.
Answer: We reiterate on behalf of our client that to allow the Complaint to proceed at this stage would require our client to launch an investigation to look into allegations relating to incidents that occurred more than three years ago. Our client cannot help but be prejudiced by the Complainants' delay in filing the Complaint.
You have also asked for additional information concerning the merits of Ms. Price's Complaint. Our client relies on the particulars set out in our firm's correspondence dated September 7, 2000, in addition to the documentary evidence already provided to the Commission. We advise that Concord Transportation Inc. does not have specific policies addressing the composition of driving teams and, in particular, whether team members of opposite sex are allowed. We reiterate, however, that our client currently engages three female owner/operators and approximately eighteen (18) husband and wife owner/operator teams. Our client also employs female drivers through Unique Personnel Services Inc., a placement agency. ..."