 [17] 
  The  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations 
 , SOR/2002-227 [ 
 Regulations 
 ] provides: 
 
 
 
 75. (1) For the purposes of subsection 12(2) of the Act, the federal skilled worker class is hereby prescribed as a class of persons who are skilled workers and who may become permanent residents on the basis of their ability to become economically established in Canada and who intend to reside in a province other than the Province of Quebec. 
 
 
 
 (2)  
 A foreign national is a skilled worker If 
 
 
 
 (a) within the 10 years preceding the date of their application for a permanent resident visa,  
 they have at least one year of continuous full-time employment experience 
 , as described in subsection 80(7), or the equivalent in continuous part-time employment in one or more occupations, other than a restricted occupation, that are listed in Skill Type 0 Management Occupations or Skill Level A or B of the National Occupational Classification matrix; 
 
 
 
 (b) during that period of employment they performed the actions described in the lead statement for the occupation as set out in the occupational descriptions of the National Occupational Classification; And 
 
 
 
 (c) during that period of employment they performed a substantial number of the main duties of the occupation as set out in the occupational descriptions of the National Occupational Classification, including all of the essential duties. 
 
 
 
 ... 
 
 
 
 76. (1) For the purpose of determining  
 whether a skilled worker, as a member of the federal skilled worker class 
 , will be able to become  
 economically established in Canada, they must be assessed on the basis of the following criteria 
 : 
 
 
 
 (a)  
 the skilled worker must be awarded not less than the minimum number of required points 
  referred to in subsection 
 
 
 
 (2)  
 on the basis of the following factors 
 , namely, 
 
 
 
 ... 
 
 
 
 (iii)  
 experience 
 , in accordance with section 80, 
 
 
 
 ... 
 
 
 
 78. (1) The definitions in this subsection apply in this section. 
 
 
 
 "full-time" means, in relation to a program of study leading to an educational credential, at least 15 hours of instruction per week during the academic year, including any period of training in the workplace that forms part of the course of instruction. 
 
 
 
 "full-time equivalent" means, in respect of part-time or accelerated studies, the period that would have been required to complete those studies on a full-time basis. 
 
 
 
 (2)  
 A maximum of 25 points shall be awarded for a skilled worker's education as follows 
 : 
 
 
 
 ... 
 
 
 
 (d)  
 20 points for 
 
 
 
 (i) a two-year post-secondary educational credential, other than a university educational credential, and a total of at least 14 years of completed fulltime or full-time equivalent studies, or 
 
 
 
 (ii)  
 a two-year university educational credential at the bachelor's level and a total of at least 14 years of completed full-time or full-time equivalent studies 
 ; 
 
 
 
 (e)  
 22 points for 
 
 
 
 (i) a three-year post-secondary educational credential 
 , other than a university educational credential,  
 and a total of at least 15 years of completed fulltime 
   
 or full-time equivalent studies 
 , or 
 
 
 
 ... 
 
 
 
 80. (1)  
 Up to a maximum of 21 points shall be awarded to a skilled worker for full-time work experience 
 , or the full-time equivalent for part-time work experience, within the 10 years preceding the date of their application, as follows: 
 
 
 
 (a) for one year of work experience, 15 points 
 ; 
 
 
 
 (b) for two years of work experience, 17 points 
 ; 
 
 
 
 (c) for three years of work experience, 19 points; and 
 
 
 
 (d) for four or more years of work experience, 21 points. [Emphasis added] 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 