 [30] 
  In the oft-cited  
 Cepeda-Gutierrez v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [1998] FCJ no 1425, 157 FTR 35, Justice Evans (now of the Federal Court of Appeal) stated: 
 
 
 
 [15]  
 The Court may infer that the administrative agency under review made the erroneous finding of fact "without regard to the evidence" from the agency's failure to mention in its reasons some evidence before it that was relevant to the finding, and pointed to a different conclusion from that reached by the agency 
 . Just as a court will only defer to an agency's interpretation of its constituent statute if it provides reasons for its conclusions, so a court will be reluctant to defer to an agency's factual determinations in the absence of express findings, and an analysis of the evidence that shows how the agency reached its result. 
 
 
 
 [16] On the other hand, the reasons given by administrative agencies are not to be read hypercritically by a court ( 
 Medina v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
  (1990), 12 Imm. L.R. (2d) 33 (F.C.A.)), nor are agencies required to refer to every piece of evidence that they received that is contrary to their finding, and to explain how they dealt with it (see, for example,  
 Hassan v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
  (1992), 147 N.R. 317 (F.C.A.). That would be far too onerous a burden to impose upon administrative decision-makers who may be struggling with a heavy case-load and inadequate resources. A statement by the agency in its reasons for decision that, in making its findings, it considered all the evidence before it, will often suffice to assure the parties, and a reviewing court, that the agency directed itself to the totality of the evidence when making its findings of fact. 
 
 
 
 [17]  
 However, the more important the evidence that is not mentioned specifically and analyzed in the agency's reasons, the more willing a court may be to infer from the silence that the agency made an erroneous finding of fact "without regard to the evidence" 
 :  
 Bains v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
  (1993), 63 F.T.R. 312 (F.C.T.D.). In other words, the agency's burden of explanation increases with the relevance of the evidence in question to the disputed facts. Thus, a blanket statement that the agency has considered all the evidence will not suffice when the evidence omitted from any discussion in the reasons appears squarely to contradict the agency's finding of fact. Moreover, when the agency refers in some detail to evidence supporting its finding, but is silent on evidence pointing to the opposite conclusion, it may be easier to infer that the agency overlooked the contradictory evidence when making its fining of fact. [Emphasis added]