 [21] 
  Counsel for the applicant advanced a number of reasons for setting aside the tribunal's decision: 
 
 
 
 1. She argues the tribunal misread the evidence when it drew contradictions between the applicant's testimony, his PIF and his Schedule I of the POE. That error principally stemmed from misreading the applicant's written answers in Schedule I of the POE which focused on the start date of his becoming a member of the Awami League organizations he belonged to and not on when he acceded to a number of positions within those organizations. She specifically cited the December 1997 date of his joining the Student League as an example. 
 
 
 
 2. She made the same point with respect to the apparent contradiction on when he first held the position of Assistant General Secretary of the Student League (October 2000 in his POE contrasted with September 2001 in his testimony). His explanation is at Certified Tribunal Record (CTR) page 182 where he testified that in October 2000 he was an ordinary member without holding any position because he was not studying at that time but continued his studies in September 2001 when he began pursuing his Bachelor of Commerce Degree. 
 
 
 
 3. She characterized the conflict between his testimony as to when he ceased to occupy the position of General Secretary of his unit in the Juba League (August 2004 versus November 2004) as a minor technical point because of the explanation he gave for making the mistake in the POE notes and that, in any event, this point was of no consequence because he was in hiding and planning to leave and when he wrote it he was out of the country. 
 
 
 
 4. She agreed with the fact exhibits P-11 and P-12 from the Awami League did not mention any mass arrests on April 29, 2004 nor did they mention his detention by the police from April 29, 2004 to May 2, 2004. She argued, however, that this one detention was of minor relevance since the essence of the applicant's claim focused on the threats and attacks made against him by BNP goons of the rival political party who were sending the police after the applicant which those letters confirmed. She said the applicant's claim is not about past persecution but his fear of what will happen to him in the future should he be forced to return to Bangladesh. In any event, these exhibits were third party letters and the applicant explained he did not know why his arrest was not mentioned in them. 
 
 
 
 5. She conceded there was a contradiction in the applicant's testimony when he answered that he had not experienced any problems with the police before August 27, 2004. She argues, however, he had provided an explanation which the tribunal did not properly assess. 
 
 
 
 6. The tribunal rejected his explanation why he decided to flee Bangladesh only after the August 25, 2004 incident. The explanation he gave to the tribunal was that the August 24/25, 2004 incident with Monir Hajee was very serious since he for the first time threatened to kill the applicant. Counsel for the applicant argues his rejection was unreasonable since the tribunal disregarded the nature of political action in Bangladesh and the applicant's overall testimony on the point. 
 
 
 
 7. Finally, counsel for the applicant pointed to another explanation which she argues was unreasonably rejected. The tribunal concluded the applicant was unable to explain why his father required the help of a lawyer so late since the police had allegedly been looking for him since August 2004. The tribunal concluded he could not furnish a reasonable explanation on the issue. Counsel argues the tribunal misread the evidentiary record since the point made by the applicant in his testimony was that he wanted to know and was trying to find out why the police were still looking for him. He wanted to know this because he had committed no crime. His lawyer's letter confirms the police had laid no charges against the applicant nor was there an outstanding warrant of arrest. His lawyer did write "Per the order of Minister Aman Ullah Aman, they want to question Sadat Jamil" a detention which is possible under the  
 Special Powers Act 
 .