 [27] 
  At pages 258 and 259, the Court in  
 Salibian 
  summarized the following key legal principles: 
 
 
 
 "It can be said in light of earlier decisions by this Court on claims to Convention refugee status that 
 
 
 
 (1)  
 the applicant does not have to show that he had himself been persecuted in the past or would himself be persecuted in the future 
 ; 
 
 
 
 (2) the applicant can show that the fear he had resulted not from reprehensible acts committed or likely to be committed directly against him but from reprehensible acts committed or likely to be committed against members of a group to which he belonged; 
 
 
 
 (3) a situation of civil war in a given country is not an obstacle to a claim provided the fear felt is not that felt indiscriminately by all citizens as a consequence of the civil war, but that felt by the applicant himself, by a group with which he is associated, or, even, by all citizens on account of a risk of persecution based on one of the reasons stated in the definition; and 
 
 
 
 (4) the fear felt is that of a reasonable possibility that the applicant will be persecuted if he returns to his country of origin (see  
 Seifu v. Immigration Appeal Board 
 , A-277-82, Pratte, J.A., judgment dated 12/1/83, F.C.A., not reported, cited in  
 Adjei v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
 , [1989] 2 F.C. 680 (C.A.), at page 683;  
 Darwich v. Minister of Manpower and Immigration 
 , [1979] 1 F.C. 365 (C.A.);  
 Rajudeen v. Minister of Employment and Immigration 
  (1984), 55 N.R. 129 (C.A.), at pages 133 and 134). 
 
 
 
 "The impugned decision falls squarely within the line of authority described by Prof. Hathaway as follows: 
 
 
 
 'In view of the probative value of the experiences of persons similarly situated to a refugee claimant, it is ironic that Canadian courts historically have shown a marked reluctance to recognize the claims of persons whose apprehension of risk is borne out in the suffering of large numbers of their fellow citizens.  
 Rather than looking to the fate of other members of the claimant's racial, social, or other group as the best indicator of possible harm, decision makers have routinely disfranchised refugees whose concerns are based on generalized group-defined oppression. 
 ' 
 
 
 
 and I adopt this description of the applicable law to be found at the end of the aforementioned article: 
 
 
 
 'In sum, while modern refugee law is concerned to recognize the protection needs of particular claimants, the best evidence that an individual faces a serious chance of persecution is usually the treatment afforded similarly situated persons in the country of origin.  
 In the context of claims derived from situations of generalized oppression, therefore, the issue is not whether the claimant is more at risk than anyone else in her country, but rather whether the broadly based harassment or abuse is sufficiently serious to substantiate a claim to refugee status 
 . If persons like the applicant may face serious harm for which the state is accountable, and if that risk is grounded in their civil or political status, then she is properly considered to be a Convention refugee.'" (My emphasis, footnote omitted.) 
 
 