[80]
These principles being clearly set out, Iacobucci, J., in
Parry Sound
then addressed the issue whether the grievance arbitrator had jurisdiction to hear the grievance. Indeed, it was submitted in that case that although the arbitrator had the power to interpret and apply human rights and other employment-related statutes under the statutory scheme relating to grievance dispute resolution in Ontario, that power could only be exercised if it had already been determined that the arbitrator had, at the outset, jurisdiction over the subject matter of the grievance. Iacobucci, J., accepted that argument, but held that it was not determinative in that case (
Parry Sound
at paras. 48-49) (Emphasis added):
"But even if it is true that a dispute must be arbitrable before an arbitrator obtains the power to interpret and apply the
Human Rights Code
, it does not thereby follow that an alleged contravention of an express provision of a collective agreement is a condition precedent of an arbitrator's authority to enforce the substantive rights and obligations of employment-related statutes.
Under
McLeod
, the broad right of an employer to manage operations and direct the work force is subject not only to the express provisions of the collective agreement but also to the statutory rights of its employees. This means that the right of a probationary employee to equal treatment without discrimination is implicit in each collective agreement. This, in turn, means that the dismissal of an employee for discriminatory reasons is, in fact, an arbitrable difference, and that the arbitrator has the power to interpret and apply the substantive rights and obligations of the
Human Rights Code
for the purpose of resolving that difference.
"Consequently, it cannot be inferred from the scheme of the
LRA
that it was the legislature's intention to displace or otherwise restrict the legal principles enunciated in
McLeod
. The appellant's submissions in respect of the structure of s. 48 are consistent with the conclusion that the substantive rights and obligations of the
Human Rights
Code
are implicit in each collective agreement over which an arbitrator has jurisdiction. If an arbitrator is to enforce an employer's obligation to exercise its management rights in accordance with the statutory provisions that are implicit in each collective agreement, the arbitrator must have the power to interpret and apply human rights and other employment-related statutes. Section 48(12)(j) confirms that an arbitrator does, in fact, have this right."