[5]
The applicant's story of extreme abuse by her husband is fully described in the narrative portion of her complete Personal Information Form ("PIF") in support of her refugee claim. [see footnote 4] An abridged account is quoted as follows in order to gain a full appreciation of the depth and severity of what the applicant says she experienced:
"I was married at the early age of eighteen (18) years. This was in 1971. My husband, Owen Griffith, was twenty-six (26) years old at that time. I had three (3) children by him before the marriage. Owen was about six feet three inches tall and over 185 pounds at the time.
"About two (2) months after the marriage, everything went wrong. My husband had a job ... and took care of the home and children in terms of financial support. He met another woman ... After meeting her, he stopped supporting me and my children. My husband would come home asking for his lunch/dinner and I would have to explain to him that I did not have any money to buy groceries. My husband would become angry and would hit me in the face - sometimes it was a slap and other times it would be a punch. At times, it would be more than one blow and other times it would be multiple blows.
"During this period, we were living with my father and one night, he complained to my father that I did not give him any dinner. My father called me and he asked me why I did not prepare dinner for Owen and I explained to him that I went into Owen's envelope to get money to buy groceries to make dinner - I did not get any further in my explanation. Owen punched me in my eye and then started to beat me. To this day, I still have a scar over my eye. After Owen beat me, he attacked my father ... The attack by Owen on my father caused him a head injury which caused my father had (sic) to spend a week in the Georgetown Hospital ...
"I left my father's house and went to live with Owen and for a while things were good between us. When I became pregnant with my fourth child, Owen began beating me again. I went to stay with my father. About three (3) to four (4) weeks later, my husband came to my father's house and asked me to come home. He promised me things would be different. Owen convinced me and I returned home with him.
"On December 24, 1975, my father gave me some money to pay his taxes for him. My husband took the money and bought rum with it. I explained to Owen that the money was not mine - it belonged to my father. Owen replied, 'What ever is in my house is mine'. We began to argue. At that time I had a broken arm (this was not caused by my husband [as] I had fallen off a donkey and had broken my arm). Owen grabbed my broken arm and twisted it until I fell to the ground and then he started to beat me ... My husband hit me in the head with a 4x4. I staggered out of the yard and went to my neighbour's house ... My head was bleeding heavily. I left ... Owen caught up with me a very short (sic) way ... He pulled me into a neighbour's yard ... and poured a bucket of water over my head. The bucket of water was sitting in her yard at the time. Next, he picked up a big stone and raised the stone with both his hands to drop the stone on me ... Before he could complete the action, I grabbed this uncle's girlfriend ... who was close by, and used her as a human shield ... We then ran into [the] kitchen and we locked the door from the inside. Owen got an axe which he probably found in the yard where the neighbour was cutting wood for the oven, and began to hit the door with it ... He split the door in two ... By this time, the road was full of spectators ... I could hear the people in the crowd saying, 'If he wants to kill her, that's his business'.
"The most serious threat to my life happened on a Sunday, in the fields while I was attending to some goats. This was exactly one (1) week after I had left home following an argument with Owen. Since that time, I had been staying at my father's house. Apparently that day, Owen hid close to the area where I had the goats because when I passed the area where he was hidden, he jumped out of the bush and began to strangle me. While he was strangling me, he said that a 'hungry man is an angry man'. I believed that because I was not cooking for him, he was upset.
"I resisted Owen as much as I could but I could not get his hands from my throat. My knees began to buckle and I fell to the ground fraughting (sic) at the corners of my mouth. My eyes were closed and I believe Owen thought that I was dead because he released the hold on my throat and I laid very still. The truth is I do not know whether I was semi-conscious or fully conscious. All I remember was that I could again breath air into my lungs but I laid still until Owen walked away from me. After he was at a distance walking up the hill, I got up and he saw me. He then turned around and started to come back towards me. I began to run and I screamed 'Murder'! 'Murder'. Some boys were playing cricket on the other side of the river and they heard my screams and they start running towards my direction. At that time, Owen apparently saw them because he stopped chasing after me.
"Another day, after the children had gone to school and my father had left, Owen came into the house and started to beat me and he ripped off my clothes. I ran out of the house wearing only my under wear (panty and bra) and ran into the neighbour's ... house. The neighbour tried to stop my husband. Owen pushed her out of his way and attempted to enter the house ...
"Over the years, Owen continued to beat me and I continued to report him to the police but no charges were ever laid. My husband had threatened to kill me several times. He said he would kill me, then hide my body so no one could find it.
"I recall two beatings which occurred in 1979 when the La Soufriere (a volcano on the Island) erupted and we had to relocate to another part of the Island (a place call (sic) Biabou). It was a Saturday, and we had been at the camp for a while, and Owen wanted to go back to Overland (our home) because he claimed there was no privacy at the camp. ... He then began to beat me ... The following day (Sunday), I was sitting in the Church yard with some other people. I saw Owen coming towards me but I did not run. I had not done him anything since the incident the last evening so I thought nothing of it. He had a machete (we call it a cutlass) and he came up to me and without a single word to me, he attacked me. He struck me across my shoulder with the machete several times. At the time Owen attacked me with the machete (cutlass), the other people fled. I asked one of the women ... who had witnessed the beating to come with me to the Police station so I could make another report. She accompanied me but refused to make a statement fearing that Owen would come after her.
"In 1981, around Holy Thursday, I recall that I was waiting for Owen to come home because he normally gets paid then and so I wanted some money to do grocery. Not seeing him, I sent our oldest son to find him at the rum shop and to ask him for money to buy groceries. He sent back a message that he had no money and that 'I was too fresh'. My oldest son advised me that I should leave the home because he feared that when Owen came home, he was going to beat me. I did not leave because at that time, I was preparing the pig's food and simply put, at that time, I really did not feel like going to beg another person for lodging.
"When Owen came in, I was sitting outside on the steps to the house and the house was in darkness because we did not even have matches to light the lamp in the house. He asked me for the matches and I did not answer. He then repeated and said 'Woman, it's you I'm speaking to'. He then said to me that I should get away from there (meaning the house) and I did not move. I recall that three (3) of the children were also in the yard and the youngest child was inside the house sleeping. Owen then came out of the house and began to punch me. I ran into his Aunt's ... house and her son ... was at home at that time, and he let me in. He told Owen that he was not welcome to come into the house but that did not stop him at all. He came into the house with a belt in his hand and he struck me in the face with the head of the buckle. I recall that the belt had a large iron head and this is what he used to injure me. I suffered a cut over my eye where I still do have the scar.
"After Owen hit me, I ran through the back door and into [a neighbour's] house where I was allowed to stay for one (l) week. The three (3) children accompanied me that evening and a friend of mine went to pick up the last child and kept her for me until the next day.
"Between 1982 to 1984, Owen was away·from St. Vincent in Trinidad so there was a calm period for me. When he returned, he got a job ... as a security guard. I must state that prior to getting the job, for about six months, we lived in peace. He was not working for this period. Once he got the job, it was as if his power returned and the beatings began again.
"In April of 1992, (at that time all my children were grown) two of my daughters and I were home alone. Owen came into the house carrying a saw and grabbed me. One of my daughters jumped between us. She told him that I did not do anything and she was not going stand there and allow him to beat me. Owen cut our daughter on her forehead with the saw. By this time, our son had come home. My husband turned to our son and asked him if he wanted to fight with him too. The two of them went outside and fought. I believe that the reason why Owen attacked us was because he might have been upset at the jokes his dominoes playing friends gave him while they were playing dominoes. I believe he felt frustrated and just wanted to take out his frustration on us. As usual, I also suspected that he was drinking alcohol.
"My husband continued to beat me but I stopped reporting the incidents to the police. What was the use. Over the years they never came to my rescue. The authorities in St. Vincent do not take spousal assault seriously. The man is the head of the household and how he runs his house is his business.
"Many of the beatings are embedded in my memory but some of the dates, I cannot recall.
"The day that I left St. Vincent, my husband was not at home. I had earlier sent my bags to another part of the Island, close to the Airport at my friend's house ... That day, I took a bus and went to pick up my bags and then went on to the Airport which was a short distance away. The time of the flight was 1:30 p.m. on June 6, 1992. I arrived in Canada the same day.
"In 1996, I applied for landing under Humanitarian and Compassionate grounds. In 1997, I was turned down. I raised the issue of the domestic abuse before the Immigration officer but she wanted to know why I did not go to a shelter or leave the home. She never took me seriously. After my rejection, I called my Uncle ... here in Canada who knew about my problems and he told me to call the Vincentian Consulate ... [T]he Consulate General referred me to [my counsel] Mr. Barnwell, who told me that I could claim Convention Refugee Status. I did not know about making a Refugee Claim before.
"I continue to fear my husband. After all, I left him without his permission and I know for a fact that if I go back to St. Vincent, there would not be any protection from the police. My understanding is that despite the fact that a piece of legislation was brought in after I left, all indications are, that the police attitudes have not change (sic) towards domestic abuse. After all, we are considered to be the property of our husbands or boyfriends."
B. Breach Of Natural Justice