 [7] 
  The sections of the  
 Income Tax Act 
  relevant to this proceeding are as follows: 
 
 
 
 "231.2(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Minister may, subject to subs. (2), for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement of this Act, by notice served personally or by registered or certified mail, require that any person provide, within such reasonable time as is stipulated in the notice, 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (b) any document. 
 
 
 
 "232(1) In this section, 
 
 
 
 (a) 'judge' means a judge of a superior court having jurisdiction in the province where the matter arises or a judge of the Federal Court of Canada; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (e) 'solicitor-client privilege' means the right, if any, that a person has in a superior court in the province where the matter arises to refuse to disclose an oral or documentary communication on the ground that the communication is one passing between him and his lawyer in professional confidence, except that for the purposes of this section an accounting record of a lawyer, including any supporting voucher or cheque, shall be deemed not to be such a communication. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(4) Where a document has been seized and placed in custody under subs. (3) or is being retained under subs. (3.1), the client, or the lawyer on behalf of the client, may 
 
 
 
 (a) within 14 days after the day the document was so placed in custody or commenced to be so retained apply, on three clear days notice of motion to the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, to a judge for an order 
 
 
 
 (i) fixing a day, not later than 21 days after the date of the order, and place for the determination of the question whether the client has a solicitor-client privilege in respect of the document, and 
 
 
 
 (ii) requiring the production of the document to the judge at that time and place; 
 
 
 
 (b) serve a copy of the order on the Deputy Attorney General of Canada and, where applicable, on the custodian within six days of the day on which it was made and, within the same time, pay to the custodian the estimated expenses of transporting the document to and from the place of hearing and of safeguarding it; and 
 
 
 
 (c) if the client or lawyer has proceeded as authorized by paragraph (b), apply at the appointed time and place for an order determining the question. 
 
 
 
 "(5) An application under paragraph (4)(c) shall be heard 'in camera', and on the application 
 
 
 
 (a) the judge may, if the judge considers it necessary to determine the question, inspect the document and, if the judge does so, the judge shall ensure that it is repackaged and resealed; and 
 
 
 
 (b) the judge shall decide the matter summarily and, 
 
 
 
 (i) if the judge is of the opinion that the client has a solicitor-client privilege in respect of the document, shall order the release of the document to the lawyer, and 
 
 
 
 (ii) if the judge is of the opinion that the client does not have a solicitor-client privilege in respect of the document, shall order 
 
 
 
 (A) that the custodian deliver the document to the officer or some other person designated by the Deputy Minister of National Revenue, in the case of a document that was seized and placed in custody under subs. (3), or 
 
 
 
 (B) that the lawyer make the document available for inspection or examination by the officer or other person designated by the Deputy Minister of National Revenue, in the case of a document that was retained under subs. (3.1), and the judge shall, at the same time, deliver concise reasons in which the judge shall identify the document without divulging the details thereof." 
 
 