[20]
The constitutional rights enshrined in s. 11 of the
Charter
are procedural safeguards designed to afford protection to an accused person in the context of the prosecution of "... public offences involving punitive sanctions, i.e. criminal, quasi-criminal and regulatory offences ...". (See
R. v. Wigglesworth
, [1987] 2 S.C.R. 541, 554;
Trumbley and Pugh et al. v. Toronto Police Force et al.
(1986), 15 O.A.C. 279; 29 D.L.R.(4th) 557, 570 (C.A.); appeal dismissed in
Trumbley and Pugh v. Metropolitan Toronto Police et al.
, [1987] 2 S.C.R. 577; 81 N.R. 212; 24 O.A.C. 372) Section 11(d) of the
Charter
[see footnote 2] provides the applicant with a constitutional right to be presumed innocent by the court that conducts his trial on the charges arising from the alleged sexual assault in 1984. However, the applicant was not in jeopardy on these charges in the detention review before the Board and cannot by any stretch of the imagination be said to have been subject to prosecution in that forum. The detention review proceedings were administrative in nature and, in conducting the review, the Board was required by s. 132(1) of the
Act
to consider any factor relevant to a determination of "... the likelihood of the commission of an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person ...". Furthermore, under s. 101 of the
Act
, the protection of society was the paramount consideration guiding the Board in the discharge of its functions. In my opinion, the existence of criminal charges for sexual offences alleged to have been committed by the applicant was a highly relevant factor to be considered by the Board, regardless of the date of the alleged incident. This evidence was of particular importance in the circumstances of this case, given the reluctance of the applicant to accept any blame for the offence which led to his incarceration, his denial of aberrant sexual conduct and his lack of therapeutic progress. Although the applicant has a constitutionally protected right to be presumed innocent in the context of his prosecution on the outstanding criminal charges, he had no such corresponding right in the administrative proceedings before the Board. In my opinion, it would have been inconsistent with the law and the public interest in ensuring the effective protection of society for the Board have presumed him to be innocent on those charges.
Decision