[4]
The plaintiff then applied for an interim interlocutory injunction against the defendants to prevent them from carrying on such activity pending trial. This application was argued before Walsh, J., on October 29, 1985 and several of the defendants, including O.S. Micro Systems Inc., Lami Yee Lam, and Jack Liu were represented by counsel. On November 14, 1985 Walsh, J., issued an interim injunction, to continue until final disposition of the plaintiff's application for an interlocutory injunction, prohibiting the defendants from:
"(a) importing, distributing, assembling, manufacturing, advertising, offering for sale, demonstrating and selling computers and computer components,
(i) which contain a copy or substantial copy of the literary works Apple IIe Programme, and Enhanced Apple IIe Programme, being the Plaintiff's copyrighted works which are the subject matter of Canadian Copyright Registrations 444,381 and 444,382 respectively, or alternatively,
(ii) which contain contrivances by means of which the said copyrighted works may be mechanically performed or delivered.
"(b) importing, distributing, assembling, manufacturing, advertising, offering for sale, demonstrating and selling computers which appear to be or in fact are copies in three dimensions of the Plaintiff's two dimensional drawings and plans for the cases of its Apple II, Apple IIe, and Enhanced Apple IIe computers or a substantial part thereof.
"(c) importing, distributing, assembling, manufacturing, advertising, offering for sale, demonstrating and selling computers having applied thereto a trade mark which is confusing with the trademark 'Apple Logo and Design' forming the subject matter of Canadian Trade Mark Registration 264,154; ..."
According to the court file, the registry sent a copy of this order to Robert MacFarlane, counsel for, inter alia, Minitronics, Angel Li Lam, O.S. Micro Systems Inc., Lami Yee Lam, and Jack Liu, by registered mail on November 15, 1985. Also there is on file a copy of the order with an acknowledgement of its service on Mr. MacFarlane dated December 2, 1985. (While Mr. MacFarlane at the hearing protested that this acknowledgement was given solely by his secretary, it was made in the name of his firm who were the solicitors of record and I believe must be viewed as a proper admission of service in the absence of proof to the contrary.)