[14]
From the foregoing I am satisfied that the knowledge and conduct of the three respondents Lam, Liu, and Wu, and those they supervised, provide the essential evidence relevant to the knowledge of the corporate respondents O.S. and Comtex Micro System Inc. The evidence satisfies me that all of them were aware of the injunctions and were even aware that an injunction application was pending in the autumn of 1985. Robert Harris who was employed by these gentlemen, first on behalf of O.S. Micro Systems commencing in August, 1985 and later on behalf of Comtex until the fall of 1986, testified that he overheard Lam, Liu, and Wu discussing with a Mr. Strachan in mid-October, 1985 the fact that they had been served with the notice of an application for an injunction. At that time O.S. had somewhere between 10 and 100 allegedly infringing computers on hand, according to Mr. Harris, and a shipment of another 200 was on the way from Taiwan. It was decided during this discussion that the existing inventory plus the new shipment would be invoiced to Concord before there was a decision on the injunction, while O.S. would retain possession. This clearly indicates a knowledge of an impending injunction. About the same time Harris was told by either Lam or Liu that the applicant was trying to obtain an injunction against them. He was told by one of the three principals in January, 1986 that an injunction had been issued. Certain procedures were also changed after the service of the notice of motion for the injunction: staff were instructed to refer to the machines in question by a different model number and were told not to sell them except to dealers whom they knew and with whom they had dealt before. The evidence of Harris was corroborated in certain respects by other witnesses. Mr. Gumley, a computer dealer who purchased from the respondents, was advised by Lami Lam in approximately March, 1986 that there was an injunction which prevented them from selling the computer of the type put in as Exhibit P6 at the hearing. Pat Costello, a private investigator employed by the applicant, was told by a salesman at O.S. Micro Systems in December, 1985 that the latter was prevented by an injunction from selling Apple-type computers. These facts are only consistent with the respondents having knowledge of the original injunction. They were obliged to assume that that injunction continued until terminated or until the trial, neither of which events has ever happened.
CONTUMACIOUS ACTS