[37]
Briefly put, I rejected these contentions and held the documents to be admissible. In the first place, I distinguished this situation from cases where the courts had expressed reluctance to issue orders of discovery or production in penal cases. (E.g. Rank Film Distributors Ltd. et al. v. Video Information Centre et al., [1981] 2 All E.R. 76 (H. of L.); Amway of Canada Ltd. v. The Queen (1986), 72 N.R. 211; 34 D.L.R.(4th) 201, at 206 (F.C.A.), leave to appeal refused by S.C.C. December 3, 1987.) In the present case we were faced with the fact that an order had already been given: the respondents had not moved in the six and one-half months since its execution to set aside that order nor had they appealed it. The material obtained by it directly and indirectly was now before the court. I concluded that this was not a "search or seizure" in the meaning of s. 8 of the Charter (Director of Investigation and Research and Chairman of the Restrictive Trade Practices Commission v. Ziegler et al. (1983), 51 N.R. 1; 81 C.P.R.(2d) 1 (F.C.A.); Thomson Newspapers Ltd. et al. v. Director of Investigation and Research (1986), 34 D.L.R.(4th) 413 (Ont. C.A.)) and in any event it was carried out pursuant to court order and in a reasonable way. Moreover, I held that in accordance with the authorities, s. 11(c) and s. 13 of the Charter applied only to protect witnesses from being obliged to testify. (R. v. Altseimer (1982), 38 O.R.(2d) 783 (C.A.).) There was nothing of that sort here. Mr. Wu, when he answered the question of counsel for the applicant, was not a "Witness": he was not under oath and the evidence does not even indicate that he felt obliged to answer. I concluded that s. 2(d) of the Canadian Bill of Rights provided no greater protection in this respect than the Charter. (See Ziegler case, supra note 15, at 23.) I further observed that even if there had been a violation of the Charter, I would not think this an appropriate case to apply s. 24(2) of the Charter so as to deny, admission of the evidence. This surely is not a situation where the admission of such evidence "would bring the administration of justice into disrepute": the evidence was obtained by virtue of a court order; there was provision in that order for the respondents to move at any time to set it aside which they did not do; there was no evidence of duress, even psychological, being applied to Mr. Wu in order to obtain the information from him as to the location of the documents in question; and those documents were in turn obtained pursuant to another court order and brought before me by a public official, many months after the respondents knew that the applicant was aware of the location of these documents and was taking steps to obtain them by legal means. This sequence of events can hardly be viewed as bringing the administration of justice into disrepute. Instead I concluded that there were no Charter or Bill of Rights reasons for refusing admission of the documents and that the basic common law rule applied that once a party has evidence, no matter how it has been obtained, he is entitled to use it if it is relevant.