 [14] 
  Mr. Justice Cullen considered the application of the doctrine of functus officio to a visa officer's decision in  
 Chan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [1996] 3 F.C. 349; 114 F.T.R. 247 (T.D.). The issue was whether a visa officer could revoke visas that had been issued to a woman and her son as a result of information the visa officer subsequently obtained that the woman was involved with a criminal triad. Mr. Justice Cullen quoted the above passage from  
 Chandler 
  and commented as follows at pp. 366-367: 
 
 
 
 "I understand this decision to mean that administrative decision-making, because it is more flexible and less formalistic than judicial decision-making, can be 're-opened' in the interests of justice where the enabling statute contemplates reconsideration of a decision. 
 
 
 
 "Does the  
 Immigration Act 
  contemplate that a visa officer can reconsider his decision? There is nothing in the statute that deals with whether a visa officer may review decisions already made.  
 I would take this silence, however, not to be a prohibition against reconsideration of decisions. Rather, I think that the visa officer has jurisdiction to reconsider his decision, particularly when new information comes to light. 
  One can well imagine a situation opposite the one in the case at bar. What if the applicant was initially denied her visa because the officer considered her to be a member of the Sun Yee On triad? Could she not have brought new information to light, asking the visa officer to reconsider his decision? If the new information was persuasive, I have little doubt that the visa officer would have jurisdiction to issue a new decision, granting a visa. In my view, the same logic applies to the case at bar. The visa officer, upon receiving information that the applicant was a member of an inadmissible class, had jurisdiction to reconsider his earlier decision and revoke her visa.  
 To squeeze the administrative decisions of visa officers into the same functus officio box that is imposed on judicial decision-makers would, in my view, not accord with the role and duties of visa officers. 
 " (emphasis added)