[23]
The manner in which the respondent board dealt with applications at the material times is explained in the filed affidavit of Roger Labelle, vice-chairman of the board since April, 1980. He swore, in part, thus:
"2. Prior to the latter part of 1984, when Mr. Justice MacNair [sic] of this Honourable Court delivered his judgments in the cases of O'Brien (1984), 17 C.C.C.(3d) 163 (Court No. T-900-84 and Ford (1984), 43 C.R.(3d) 26 (Court No. T-901-84), the policy of the board with respect to the types of decisions that were required to be made by way of in-person hearings was as set out in paragraph 6 and Exhibit 'D' of the applicant's affidavit. The first (and only the first) review for day parole was then held by way of a hearing.
"4. After the judgments in O'Brien and Ford, the board had to change the policy referred to earlier in paragraph 2 of this affidavit. Since December 31, 1984, all decisions which are not required by statute or regulation to be made by way of a hearing are generally made only after a review of the inmate's file, which may include representations made by the inmate or an assistant if the inmate chooses to do so. Attached hereto as Exhibit 'A' of this my affidavit is a copy of Circular No. 1984-31, entitled 'Conduct of Hearings', which sets out the policy applicable at the time the board rendered its decision with respect to the applicant's request for day parole. ...
"5. Circular 1984-31 provided for three exceptions to the policy. The first was that all decisions which resulted in the loss of liberty already granted were and still are required to be made after a hearing (see paragraph 7 of the Charter). This exception dis [sic] not apply in the applicant's case.
"6. The second exception was set out at paragraph 6 of the Circular which provided that in exceptional circumstances, the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman could personally approve that a hearing be held even though the hearing was not required by statute ...
"7. I and, according to the information I am given, the Chairman of the Board was never asked to exercise our discretion to grant a hearing in the applicant's case. I am advised that the applicant has not asked to be provided such a hearing except in the course of the present application before this Honourable Court.
"8. The third exception to Circular 1984-31 was described at paragraph 9 of the Circular. This paragraph, which is still in force, provides that the Appeal Committee, when re-examining a decision pursuant to section 22 of the Parole Regulations or Board policy, may decide to grant a hearing even when the hearing is not required by statute or regulation to be held. Attached hereto as Exhibit 'B' to this my affidavit is the board policy on the appeal or re-examination of decisions which was applicable when the board rendered its decision denying the applicant day parole. Pursuant to that policy, the decision made against the applicant was subject to internal appeal. The applicant did not ask that the board's decision be re-examined but had he applied to the Appeal Committee, the Committee would have examined his request on the basis of the criteria set out in the paragraph 6 of the present affidavit."