[24]
Does all of this signify that the adjudication performed on the applicant's request for day parole, without an oral hearing, violated the principles of fundamental justice? Here again the reasons expressed by the Supreme Court in the Singh case are instructive. At page 213 of the Supreme Court Reports, Madam Justice Wilson is reported to have posed this question, always in regard of course to the claim for refugee status under the Immigration Act. She wrote that she was prepared to accept the:
"... submission that procedural fairness may demand different things in different contexts: see Martineau, supra, at p. 630. Thus it is possible that an oral hearing before the decision-maker is not required in every case in which s. 7 of the Charter is called into play. However, I must confess to some difficulty in reconciling [Crown counsel's] argument that an oral hearing is not required in the context of this case with the interpretation he seeks to put on s. 7. If 'the right to life, liberty and security of the person' is properly construed as relating only to matters such as death, physical liberty and physical punishment, it would seem on the surface at least that these are matters of such fundamental importance that procedural fairness would invariably require an oral hearing. I am prepared, nevertheless, to accept for present purposes that written submissions may be an adequate substitute for an oral hearing in appropriate circumstances."
The particular provisions of the statutory scheme in that immigration case were what persuaded Wilson, J., that the circumstances were inappropriate for a denial of an oral hearing, as revealed on p. 215 of the reported judgment:
"... What the [Immigration Appeal] Board has before it is a determination by the Minister based in part on information and policies to which the applicant has no means of access that the applicant for redetermination is not a Convention refugee. The applicant is entitled to submit whatever relevant material he wishes to the board but he still faces the hurdle of having to establish to the board that on the balance of probabilities the Minister was wrong. Moreover, he must do this without any knowledge of the Minister's case beyond the rudimentary reasons which the Minister has decided to give him in rejecting his claim. It is this aspect of the procedures set out in the Act which I find impossible to reconcile with the requirements of 'fundamental justice' as set out in s. 7 of the Charter."
It will be necessary to determine if the same factor presents itself upon a request to the National Parole Board to grant day parole.