[21]
The second significant issue in the Decision is the Board's view that, if the Applicant's story of persecutory abuse were true, he and his family would have left Iran much sooner. The relevant parts of the Decision read as follows:
The panel finds that the claimant does not have a subjective and a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran. The claimant alleges that his problems with Hezbollahis began in 1980. He said he was suspended from school for three weeks for writing a composition in which he expounded freedom of religion and opinion; this resulted in his expulsion from school. The claimant alleges the Hezbollahis harassed him. He went to live with his uncle in Masjid Soleiman where he attended night school. Despite the change of school and area, he alleges the harassment continued, including being called a "traitor Bakhtiari." The claimant alleges he moved back to Ahwaz where he was later drafted in the military. The panel finds that the claimant did not make any attempt to leave the country during that time he alleges he was harassed.
Further, in his account of the military experience, the claimant did not give evidence of bad treatment in the military except the fact that the alleges he was not allowed to carry weapons. The panel finds it implausible that the regime drafted someone they did not trust, kept him for 24 months and did not harass him or assign him to difficult tasks in order to punish him for his indifference to the regime.
The claimant alleges that he had difficulties finding a job upon discharge from the military due to his political background. However, between 1993 and 1998 he worked at three different companies, and was dismissed from each one of them for alleged political reasons. At one of those three jobs he said he be friend co-workers who were supporters of Mujaheddin. The claimant said his association with those co-workers led to his arrest in 1994. He said he was severely tortured physically and psychologically; detained for six weeks and bedridden for three weeks. Upon return to work he was dismissed. The panel finds the claimant's testimony not credible in that the claimant and his family did not think of leaving the country after all that alleged abuse by the security and frustration of dismissal from work.
Counsel argues in her submission (page 7, paragraph 4)-that "the situation between September 25, 1994 and March 2000 are very different. We cannot expect citizens of a repressive regime to flee their country at any occasion. There has to be a possibility of further persecution for them to be granted Convention refugee status. The definition is forward looking." The claimant alleges that his family experienced nearly twenty years of harassment and torture. If the claimant had been subjected to a number of discriminatory or harassment acts, and while those acts may individually not be serious enough to constitute persecution, they might have cumulatively amounted to persecution. If the claimant had a subjective fear of persecution, it is reasonable to expect he would have left before 2000. The panel does not believe that there was past persecution of the family, because if there had been, the family could have either made attempts to, or could have fled their country before 2000. When asked why he did not leave the country, the claimant said, he did not leave because he did not have documents on him. The panel finds claimant's response, lack of attempts to leave the country, indicative of the lack of subjective fear given the alleged abuses, expulsion from school, torture, dismissal from employment, family arrests, detention, hospitalization and having been bedridden. Therefore the panel does not believe that the claimant was ever tortured, because, if the claimant had had the experiences he alleges, he would have made attempts to leave the country earlier than he did. Further, the panel believes, if the claimant had problems finding or keeping a job, it was not from his imputed political opinions, but from causes other than those in the PIF. The panel finds the credibility of the claimant wanting.