 [13] 
  The respondent, on the other hand, relies on several cases where it has been held that internal policies and manuals are not legally binding. The leading general authority on this is  
 Martineau and Butters v. Matsqui Institution Disciplinary Board 
 , [1978] 1 S.C.R. 118; 14 N.R. 285, where it was held that the Commissioner's directives of the Correctional Service of Canada do not have the force of law but are simply for the efficient management of the institutions. While there were several cases mentioned involving other statutory regimes including provincial agencies, most pertinent for our purpose is a decision of this Court,  
 Girard v. Canada (Ministre de l'Agriculture) 
 , [1994] F.C.J. No. 420; 79 F.T.R. 219 (T.D.), by Rouleau, J. He was there dealing with the precise counterpart of the Policy in question here, namely a pre-existing policy of Treasury Board that term appointees should after five years of continuous service be offered a permanent appointment. In that case the plaintiff had worked for some four years and eleven months on term appointments and then his last term was not renewed. Some months later he was re-employed on another term appointment. He filed a complaint with the Public Service Commission but his grievance was not resolved to his satisfaction. He then commenced action for damages alleging that the failure to give him a permanent position was in violation of the Treasury Board Policy which had legal effect and created legal obligations on the government. Rouleau J., following  
 Matsqui 
 , held that this policy was 
 
 
 
 "... simply an internal rule of conduct made by the Treasury Board. It was established under a general power enjoyed by the Board under s. 11(2) of the  
 Financial Administration Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11. Although s. 10(f) gives the Treasury Board the power to make regulations 'for any other purposes necessary for the efficient administration of the Public Service of Canada', those concerned chose to proceed by way of a statement of policy. (38)."