 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Okpiaifo v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2009), 353 F.T.R. 9 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2009] F.T.R. TBEd. SE.020 
 
 
 
 Joy Itohan Okpiaifo (applicant) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration and The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness (respondents) 
 
 (IMM-5096-08; 2009 FC 906) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Okpiaifo v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) et al. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Tannenbaum, D.J. 
 
 September 14, 2009. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The applicant fled Nigeria when her husband's parents requested that she undergo female circumcision prior to delivering her child. She gave birth to a daughter in Canada. The applicant's application for refugee protection was denied. Her husband divorced her and requested that their daughter be returned to Nigeria to face female circumcision. She made a pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) application based on her membership in a particular social group, that being women at risk of female circumcision in Nigeria. The PRRA officer found that much was being done to combat female circumcision in Nigeria, that the applicant could relocate to an area where the practice was banned and that state protection would be available if she returned to Nigeria. The applicant sought judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112-116) - Application for protection (IRPA, s. 112) (incl. procedure and considerations) - The applicant fled Nigeria when her husband's parents requested that she undergo female circumcision prior to delivering her child - She gave birth to a daughter in Canada - The applicant's application for refugee protection was denied - Her husband divorced her and requested that their daughter be returned to Nigeria to face female circumcision - She made a pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) application based on her membership in a particular social group, that being women at risk of female circumcision in Nigeria - The PRRA officer found that much was being done to combat female circumcision in Nigeria, that the applicant could relocate to an area where the practice was banned and that state protection would be available if she returned to Nigeria - The applicant sought judicial review, submitting, inter alia, that the officer's finding as to the adequacy of state protection was directly contradicted by the evidence before him which revealed that, despite opposition by the authorities to the practice of female circumcision, the federal police refused to become involved in stopping it, as they considered the practice a family matter - The Federal Court dismissed the application - The simple fact that some evidence supported the applicant's argument did not mean that the officer had erred by reaching a conclusion contrary to that evidence - Often, the documentary evidence before an officer conflicted - The officer's duty was to weigh that evidence and to reach a reasonable conclusion on the basis of all of the information - The officer referred to the evidence before him, including that which revealed that the applicant possessed an internal flight alternative in Nigeria - The decision was reasonably supported by the evidence - There was no basis for intervention - See paragraphs 11 to 16. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112-116) - Application for protection (IRPA, s. 112) (incl. procedure and considerations) - The applicant fled Nigeria when her husband's parents requested that she undergo female circumcision prior to delivering her child - She gave birth to a daughter in Canada - The applicant's application for refugee protection was denied - Her husband divorced her and requested that their daughter be returned to Nigeria to face female circumcision - She made a pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) application based on her membership in a particular social group, that being women at risk of female circumcision in Nigeria - The PRRA officer found that much was being done to combat female circumcision in Nigeria, that the applicant could relocate to an area where the practice was banned and that state protection would be available if she returned to Nigeria - The applicant sought judicial review, submitting, inter alia, that the officer had failed to recognize the new risk that had arisen following the rejection of her refugee claim - The Federal Court dismissed the application - The officer considered the documentary evidence submitted by the applicant and concluded that her former husband no longer maintained an interest in the applicant or her daughter - Further, risk raised by the applicant relating to her daughter was not personal to the applicant - While such evidence might be relevant for a humanitarian and compassionate grounds application, the officer was under no obligation to consider it in the present context - The officer's decision should not be disturbed - See paragraphs 17 to 23. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1588 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112-116) - Evidence (IRPA, s. 113(a)) - [See both  
 Aliens - Topic 1583 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1594 
 
 Exclusion and expulsion - Pre-removal risk assessment (Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, ss. 112-116) - Judicial review (incl. standard of review) - The applicant fled Nigeria when her husband's parents requested that she undergo female circumcision prior to delivering her child - She gave birth to a daughter in Canada - The applicant's application for refugee protection was denied - Her husband divorced her and requested that their daughter be returned to Nigeria to face female circumcision - She made a pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) application based on her membership in a particular social group, that being women at risk of female circumcision in Nigeria - The PRRA officer found that much was being done to combat female circumcision in Nigeria, that the applicant could relocate to an area where the practice was banned and that state protection would be available if she returned to Nigeria - The applicant sought judicial review - The Federal Court dismissed the application - A finding respecting the adequacy of state protection and availability of an internal flight alternative was reviewable on the reasonableness standard - Whether the officer failed to consider the evidence before him was a question of fact, also reviewable on the reasonableness standard - See paragraphs 9 and 10. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
 Cruz Rosales et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2008] F.T.R. Uned. 221; 2008 FC 257, refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
 Rosales v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) - see Cruz Rosales et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration). 
 
 New Brunswick (Board of Management) v. Dunsmuir, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190; 372 N.R. 1; 329 N.B.R.(2d) 1; 844 A.P.R. 1, refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
 Kim v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) et al. (2005), 272 F.T.R. 62 (F.C.), refd to. [para. 10]. 
 
 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689; 153 N.R. 321, refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
 Jahan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2000] F.T.R. Uned. 212 (T.D.), refd to. [para. 13]. 
 
 Selliah et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2004), 256 F.T.R. 53; 2004 FC 872, refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
 Flores Carrillo v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2008] 4 F.C.R. 636; 377 N.R. 393 (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 15]. 
 
 Owusu-Ansah v. Minister of Employment and Immigration (1989), 98 N.R. 312; 8 Imm. L.R.(2d) 106 (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 17]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Sina Ogunleye, for the applicant; 
 
 Nina Chandy, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Sina Ogunleye, for the applicant; 
 
 John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on July 15, 2009, by Tannenbaum, D.J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following reasons for judgment on September 14, 2009. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Tannenbaum, D.J. 
 : This is an application for judicial review of the September 15, 2008 decision of Pre-Removal Risk Assessment ("PRRA") Officer A. Mazzotti. 
 
 
 
 Background 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The Applicant is a thirty-five year old citizen of Nigeria. In March 2003 she entered into an arranged marriage. After she became pregnant, her husband's parents requested that the Applicant undergo female circumcision prior to delivering her child. The Applicant had heard of the serious risks associated with this procedure, which is also known as female genital mutilation ("FGM"), and refused to accede to the requests. Her husband supported her decision and her parents attempted to appeal to the community elders, but they were rebuffed. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The stress of this situation began to take a toll on the Applicant, who says she began to suffer certain complications related to her pregnancy. She fled Nigeria for the United States, arriving on July 9, 2004. She arrived in Canada on August 27, 2004. She gave birth to her daughter on September 10, 2004. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The Applicant filed an application for refugee protection, which was denied on September 8, 2005 upon the basis of credibility and due to her failure to file for refugee protection elsewhere prior to entering Canada. Leave to judicially review this decision was denied on March 27, 2006. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  On December 21, 2005, the Applicant gave birth to her second child, who was fathered by another man. The Applicant states that subsequently, her husband divorced her and now demands that their daughter be returned to Nigeria to face FGM. She provided a letter from her former husband dated November 29, 2005 in support of this fact. She also provided a letter from her father dated July 17, 2006 indicating that he was being threatened and harassed by her husband and his family. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The Applicant's PRRA application was based upon her membership in a particular social group, that being women at risk of FGM in Nigeria. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Officer concluded that much was being done to combat the practice of FGM in Nigeria, that the Applicant could relocate to a more ethnically diverse area such as Lagos or to Edo or Osun, where the practice had been banned, and that ultimately, State protection would be available to the Applicant if she returned. 
 
 
 
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The issues are as follows: 
 
 
 
 1. Did the Officer err in respect of his conclusions regarding the adequacy of State protection? 
 
 
 
 2. Did the Officer err in failing to properly consider the evidence of risk raised by the Applicant? 
 
 
 
 Standard of Review 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  In  
 Cruz Rosales et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2008] F.T.R. Uned. 221; 2008 FC 257, Justice Gibson noted that the standard of patent unreasonableness applies to determinations of fact within the context of a state protection analysis. The two deferential standards of review have since merged into the single standard of reasonableness:  
 New Brunswick (Board of Management) v. Dunsmuir 
 , [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190; 372 N.R. 1; 329 N.B.R.(2d) 1; 844 A.P.R. 1 at para. 45. I conclude that a finding respecting the adequacy of state protection and the availability of an internal flight alternative ("IFA") should be subject to the standard of reasonableness. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Whether the Officer failed to consider the evidence before him is a question of fact and thus also appropriately made subject to review on the standard of reasonableness:  
 Kim v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) et al. 
  (2005), 272 F.T.R. 62 (F.C.) at para. 20 (F.C.). 
 
 
 
 Law and Argument 
 
 
 
 1.  
 Did the Officer err in respect of his conclusions regarding the adequacy of State protection? 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The Applicant argues that the Officer's finding as to the adequacy of State protection was directly contradicted by the evidence before him. She submits that the evidence reveals that despite opposition by the authorities to the practice of FGM, the federal police refuse to become involved in stopping it, as they consider the practice a family matter. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The Respondent argues that the State is presumed to be capable of protecting its nationals absent clear and convincing proof to the contrary. The burden rests with the Applicant in this regard:  
 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward 
 , [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689; 153 N.R. 321. The Respondent submits that the Applicant has failed to rebut this presumption. In addition, when there is evidence, as there is in this case, upon which an officer could reasonably conclude that State protection would be available, the Court should not intervene in a decision to that effect:  
 Jahan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2000] F.T.R. Uned. 212; [2000] F.C.J. No. 987 (T.D.). 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The simple fact that an applicant can point to some evidence that supports her argument does not mean that an officer has erred by reaching a conclusion contrary to that evidence. It is often the case that the documentary evidence before an officer will conflict. It is therefore the officer's duty to weigh that evidence and to reach a reasonable conclusion upon the basis of all of the information before him. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  An officer should be afforded considerable deference in undertaking this task and his decision should not be disturbed if it falls within a range of possible and acceptable outcomes, defensible on the facts and law:  
 Selliah et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
  (2004), 256 F.T.R. 53; 2004 FC 872 at para. 16;  
 Dunsmuir 
 , at para. 47. 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Further, while the Applicant argues that the Officer failed to provide an example of a situation in which the FGM law has been enforced in Nigeria, I note that the burden is on the Applicant to rebut the presumption of State protection, and not upon the Officer to establish its existence:  
 Flores Carrillo v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2008] 4 F.C.R. 636; 377 N.R. 393 (F.C.A.) at paras. 18-19, 38. 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The Officer supported his conclusion respecting the adequacy of State protection by reference to the evidence before him, including that which revealed that the Applicant possessed an IFA in Nigeria. I find that the Officer's decision is reasonably supported by the evidence and as such, can see no basis to intervene on this ground. 
 
 
 
 2.  
 Did the Officer err in failing to properly consider the evidence of risk raised by the Applicant? 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The Applicant argues that the Officer failed to recognize the new risk that arose following the rejection of the Applicant's refugee claim and the documentary evidence tendered in support. The evidence to which she refers is contained within the letters from her father and her former husband. She contends that the letters constitute new evidence demonstrating the risk that she and her daughter would face if returned to Nigeria. She submits that it is a reviewable error for an officer to reach a conclusion without regard to the evidence before him:  
 Owusu-Ansah v. Minister of Employment and Immigration 
  (1989), 98 N.R. 312; 8 Imm. L.R.(2d) 106 (F.C.A.) at 113. 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Respondent contends that the Officer considered all of the evidence before him, and gave proper consideration to the risk raised by the Applicant. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  The Officer considered the two letters and found that there was no indication that the Applicant's former husband continued to maintain any interest in the Applicant or her daughter. 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  I observe that the letter from the Applicant's father, dated approximately eight months after that from her former husband, contradicts this conclusion in part, as it refers to the Applicant's husband's continued desire to see his daughter returned in order that she undergo FGM. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  That point having been made however, the risk raised by the Applicant relating to her daughter is not personal to the Applicant. While such evidence may be ripe for consideration upon the basis of a humanitarian and compassionate application, the Officer was under no obligation to consider it in the present context:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  While the Applicant also raised in her submissions to the Officer the risk she would face at the hands of her husband given the patriarchal nature of Nigerian society, I have found above that the Officer reasonably concluded that the Applicant possesses a viable IFA such that she could relocate to an area away from her former husband if she is returned. 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  In sum, the Applicant has failed to point to any new evidence arising since her refugee decision was made that would support the argument that she herself would face a risk at the hands of her former husband or his family if returned to Nigeria. As such, the Officer's decision should not be disturbed. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [24] 
   
 THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that 
  the application for judicial review is dismissed. No question of general importance has been submitted for certification and none will be certified. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Sharon McCartney/vnh 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




