[5]
The facts of this case prior to the removal of the applicants as Councillors of the Band are as found in my Order for the interlocutory injunction,
Prince v. Sucker Creek First Nation #150A
, [2008] F.C.J. No. 599, at paragraphs 2 to 18:
"The applicants are members of the Sucker Creek First Nation (the respondent Band). They were elected as Councillors of the respondent Band Council on November 28, 2006 for terms of three years. Their elections were never challenged;
"The Sucker Creek First Nation is three and a half hours north of Edmonton;
"The respondent Band is a First Nations Band duly constituted under the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5 (the
Act
). The government structure, procedures, and custom elections of the respondent Band are governed by the
Customary Election Regulations of the Sucker Creek First Nation #150A
(the
Election Regulations
). The
Election Regulations
provide for the election of one Chief and six Councillors to act as representatives of the respondent Band for a term of three years; and
"The respondent, Jaret Cardinal, is the Chief of the respondent Band, having been elected along with the applicants on November 26, 2006. The respondents, Ronald Willier and Russell Willier, are Councillors of the respondent Band and occupy positions on Council along with the applicants.
"
Allegations of misconduct
"On or about February 6, 2008, the Chief and Council of the respondent Band received a complaint that the applicants were involved in a conflict of interest with regard to one of the Band's contractual arrangements. The allegations were contained in a letter of complaint dated February 6, 2008, written by Orlando Alexis, who is employed as the Consultation Officer of the respondent Band.
"The complaint alleged, in part:
1. the verbal abuse of Band employees;
2. 'political interference' by the applicants;
3. the diverting of work from one third party contractor to Joy Ann Prince, the daughter of the applicant George Prince and first cousin of the applicant Paulette Campiou; and
4. the unauthorized renegotiation of rates paid to third party contractors for brush and tree clearing under the contractual arrangement between the respondent Band and ATCO Electric Ltd.
"
Process leading to the suspensions
"In response to the letter of complaint, on February 7 or 8, 2008, the respondent Band Council convened a meeting to address the allegations raised therein. Both applicants were present at that meeting and had a copy of the letter of complaint.
"On February 14, 2008, the respondent Band Council convened to review the issues raised in the letter and to determine how best to proceed. The applicants were present at that meeting and presented a letter from Vic McArthur responding to, and rebutting, the allegations against them.
"On February 15, 2008 the Chief and Council convened another meeting to decide how to proceed in relation to the applicants. The applicants were excluded from this meeting.
"On February 20, 2008 the Sucker Creek First Nation received a letter (which the respondents concede was important) from Morgan Construction and Environmental Ltd. This letter alleged 'issues' regarding rates of pay for contractors, which was the main conflict of interest allegation against the applicants. This letter was never shown to the applicants.
"On February 21, 2008 the respondent Band received a memorandum from ATCO Electric Ltd. alleging problems with rates of pay for contractors involving the applicants. This memorandum was also never shown to the applicants.
"On February 22, 2008, the respondent Band Council convened a 'secret' meeting in Edmonton, Alberta, at which all of the allegations against the applicants were further deliberated. Present at that meeting were the three individual respondents, as well as Councillor David Prince. Neither of the applicants were present at the meeting, nor were they notified of its occurrence. Also not present at the meeting was Councillor Ken Cardinal, who was under suspension pending an investigation into unrelated allegations of misconduct.
"At the meeting, it was decided that the applicants should be suspended with pay until such time as an independent investigation had been conducted into the allegations contained in the letter of complaint. On or about February 29, 2008, the applicants each received a letter signed by Chief Cardinal and the two respondent Councillors advising them of the suspensions. The letters, dated February 26, 2008, are the decisions under review and stated, in part:
'Given the seriousness of this situation, the Chief and Council are compelled to act and look into this issue. Therefore, I regret to inform you that you have been suspended from your position on Council pending a full investigation into this matter. The suspension will be with pay. During the investigation, you will be prohibited from going to the Finance Office or from having any dealings with the Consultation Department or ATCO. Please turn in your keys, your cell phone as well as any other Band Property.
'... In the meantime, your suspension from your duties as a member of Council remains in place until the investigation has concluded and Council determines what step, if any, need to be taken next.'
"The applicants ignored the respondents' letters and continued to perform their duties as Councillors.
"On March 3, 2008 the applicant Paulette Campiou responded to the letter of complaint dated February 6, 2008.
"On March 10, 2008, the applicants each received another letter from the respondents advising them that if they did not abide by the suspension decision, their pay would be suspended and a special meeting called to consider removing them from office. The letters provided for a 'framework of investigation' and review, which outlined the process that the respondent Band would follow in assessing the plausibility of the allegations. As well, the letters outlined how the ultimate suspension decision was reached, stating at page 3:
'On Friday, February 22, 2008, the Chief and Council met in Edmonton, at the Hilton Garden Suites Hotel to follow up the initial review of the letter of complaint.
'Based on the information tabled, it was felt that it was in the interests of the Council's, our membership, and our community that both George Prince and Paulette Campiou be suspended pending an investigation of this letter of complaint.
'The formal vote occurred and the motion passed as the votes all registered in the affirmative. As a result, both you, Paulette Campiou and George Prince are suspended from active duty as Councillors effective immediately with pay.'
"On March 12, 2008, the applicants arrived at the offices of the respondent band and discovered that the locks on their office doors had been changed and that they were forbidden to access the premises. On March 17, 2008, the applicants filed the within application for judicial review, as well as this motion, in which they seek an interlocutory injunction allowing them to continue to carry out their duties uninterrupted until the within application is finally determined.
"On March 20, 2008, the pay of each applicant, while under suspension, was reduced from $1,750 a week each to $700 a week."