Aksonova v. Can. (M.C.I.), [2002] F.T.R. Uned. 673 (TD)
MLB unedited judgment
Galyna Aksonova (applicant) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent)
(IMM-3613-01; 2002 FCT 1056)
Indexed As: Aksonova v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
Cite As: [2002] F.T.R. Uned. 673
Federal Court of Canada
Trial Division
Heneghan, J.
October 10, 2002.
Counsel:
Federick S. Wang, for the applicant;
John Loncar, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Turner Michener, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Morris Rosenberg, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary.
[1]
Heneghan, J.
: Ms. Galyna Aksonova (the "Applicant") seeks judicial review of the decision of visa officer, Julie Montgomery (the "Visa Officer"). In her decision, dated July 6, 2001, the Visa Officer refused the Applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada.
[2]
The Applicant, a citizen of the Ukraine, filed an application for permanent residence in Canada under the independent category at the Canadian High Commission in London, England, in November, 2000. She indicated in her application that her intended occupation in Canada would be "translator" which is classified under the National Occupational Classification ("NOC") as "NOC 5125.1".
[3]
The Applicant attended an interview with the Visa Officer on July 5, 2001. In the refusal letter dated July 6, 2001, the Visa Officer awarded zero points for the Applicant's experience and occupational demand factors, on the basis that the Applicant did not meet the NOC employment requirements for her intended occupation. The specific basis for the Visa Officer's conclusion in this regard was that the Applicant did not have a degree in translation.
[4]
In my opinion, the Visa Officer applied the wrong test in assessing the Applicant's application. According to the applicable NOC job description, the employment requirements for a position of translator in Canada require a bachelor's degree in translation or a related discipline. In this case, the Visa Officer did not direct her mind or inquiries to whether the Applicant possessed a bachelor's degree in a related discipline. Instead, the Visa Officer applied the test of equivalency.
[5]
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[6]
In my opinion, the same reasoning applies here. The Visa Officer applied the wrong legal test and this application for judicial review is allowed. The matter will be remitted to a different visa officer for reconsideration in accordance with the law.
[7]
Although counsel for the Applicant submitted a question for certification, in my opinion, this proceeding does not give rise to a question of general importance. No question will be certified.
ORDER
[8]
This application for judicial review is allowed and the matter is remitted to a different visa officer for reconsideration in accordance with the law.
[End of document]
