 [5] 
  The facts relied upon by Mr. Simmonds in support of his application were set out in his request and were, verbatim, as follows: 
 
 
 
 "- The business losses claimed by Mr. Simmonds arose due to the collapse of a family business of long standing. The foundation business was a dairy operation owned by Perfection Foods Limited ('PFL'). This business was commenced by Mr. Simmonds' grandfather in the 1920s. By 1990 PFL and its related operations and companies ('the Perfection corporate group') employed approximately 350 persons throughout Atlantic Canada, and exported to Africa and the Caribbean. 
 
 
 
 "- Thereafter, difficulties arose with the P.E.I. government of the day respecting financing of PFL. This ultimately led to receiverships and bankruptcies amongst the Perfection corporate group, which in turn caused grievous financial losses to shareholders and creditors including Mr. Simmonds, in the early 1990s. The circumstances of the collapse of the Perfection corporate group are detailed in the statement of claim filed in the P.E.I. Supreme Court in 1996 against the P.E.I. government in respect of the adverse events referred to above. The action is presently continuing. 
 
 
 
 "- PGL was a company within the Perfection corporate group. In 1987 and 1988 Mr. Simmonds acquired and held all the issued and outstanding common shares of PGL, a CBCA body corporate, incorporated in 1987. At that time PGL was Mr. Simmonds' personal holding company. Mr. Simmonds held one hundred percent of the equity of PGL at all times. During this period PGL also became involved in dairy, milk hauling and property businesses. 
 
 
 
 "- Also, PGL owned a one third interest in Perfection Dairy Group Limited ('PDGL'). At all material times PDGL was a CBCA body corporate, of which the remaining two thirds of issued voting shares were held by Mr. Simmonds' father. It is PDGL that owned PFL which was the dairy operating company that was the mainstay of the Perfection corporate group. 
 
 
 
 "- PGL was a 'capital based company'. Due to the events involving the PEI government as referred to above, by 1991 PGL had no capital base. It was decimated. It remained active through to 1993 by generating a small amount of interest revenue and revenue from consulting fees. 
 
 
 
 "- By June 1993 PGL consulting had slowed down due to other demands on Mr. Simmonds, including trying to recover losses of PGL. In August and September 1993, as PDGL was also involved in business consulting, a consolidation of consulting activities with PDGL was considered so as to simplify the structure. 
 
 
 
 "- Accordingly, in September 1993 the consulting practice of PGL, with any incidental activities, was allocated over to 'Perfection Consulting Group' which, newly formed, commenced operations under the auspices of PDGL. This rendered PGL dormant effective September, 1993. 
 
 
 
 "- Also, PGL was out of the management services businesses in 1991 with the ruination of the aforesaid dairy, milk hauling and property businesses. There were absolutely no management fee contracts entered into or fees received, prospecting or promotion done in 1992 or thereafter. There was no hope of resurrecting any part of the management services revenue which had been derived from the Perfection corporate group. By 1993 the management services had ceased and could not be brought back into existence in the foreseeable future. 
 
 
 
 "- As of September 24, 1993 PGL went out of the consulting business as noted above. It then had nothing left. Everything was consolidated within PDGL including lawsuits, consulting and any miscellaneous activities. The consulting in PDGL was done under the name of Perfection Consulting Group as noted above. 
 
 
 
 "- PGL was engaged in no lawsuits in 1993 and was only named as an incidental party to the lawsuit primarily driven by PDGL in 1996 against the P.E.I. government as referred to above. This participation was 'incidental' in the sense that in the ninety-seven paragraph statement of claim, only paragraph 92 addresses any claim on behalf of PGL. 
 
 
 
 "- By December 31, 1993 PGL's accounting records showed a deficit of $801,961, operating capital of zero and a demand debt of $22,136. Not only was PGL at that point insolvent but it had no business base with which to generate solvency and was vulnerable to an involuntary bankruptcy by third party action."