 [26] 
  In this respect, I adopt what my colleague Nadon, J., said in the  
 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Cheung 
  (1998), 148 F.T.R. 237 (T.D.), where, analyzing Thurlow, J.'s, reasons for judgment in  
 Re Papadogiorgakis 
 , supra, said this: 
 
 
 
 "[6] It is clear from Mr. Justice Thurlow's comments that before the days of absence of a person can be considered for the purposes of the residence requirements under the  
 Act 
 , that person must have established his or her home in this country before departing. In the present matter, there cannot be any doubt, in my view, that the respondent never established his home in Canada before he departed on his numerous trips to Hong Kong. What the evidence reveals is that the respondent simply moved his family from Hong Kong to Canada and then returned to Hong Kong to continue his business operations in that country. As the respondent never established his home in Canada, he cannot, in my view, take advantage of the days physically spent outside of Canada to meet the requirements of paragraph 5(1)(c) of the  
 Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 "[7] To construe paragraph 5(1)(c) of the  
 Act 
  otherwise would constitute a rewriting of the paragraph which Parliament has not authorized me to do so. I agree entirely with the comments made by Pinard, J., in  
 Re Chow 
 , January 6, [1997] F.C.J. No. 7, court file T-2629-97, January 6, 1997 where he states: 
 
 
 
 'There is jurisprudence which does not require physical presence of the applicant for citizenship for the entire 1,095 days, when there are special or exceptional circumstances. However, in my view, too long an absence from Canada, albeit temporary, during that minimum period of time, as in the present case, is contrary to the purpose of the residency requirements of the  
 Act 
 . Indeed, the  
 Act 
  already allows a person who has been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence not to reside in Canada during one of the four years preceding the date of that person's application for citizenship.'"