[22]
The applicant argued, in both written and oral submissions, that she was deprived of her right to a fair trial because she could not know the evidence upon which the decision to revoke her visa was made. In my view, however, this right to know must be balanced against the competing interests of the state in protecting the safety of Canadian society and the promotion of international order by denying the use of our territory to persons likely to engage in criminal activity. In
Chiarelli
, supra, Sopinka, J., noted at p. 744 that, although the individual had an interest in a fair procedure, the state has "... a considerable interest in effectively conducting national security and criminal intelligence investigations and in protecting police sources." I also adopt the reasoning of Addy, J., in
Henrie v. Security Intelligence Review Committee et al.
, [1989] 2 F.C. 229; 24 F.T.R. 24 (T.D.), affd. (1992), 140 N.R. 315 (F.C.A.). Although the case before His Lordship concerned disclosure under the
Canada Evidence Act
, I think the principles are equally applicable to the case at bar. Mr. Justice Addy stated at p. 238 [F.C.]:
"Public interest in the administration of justice requires complete openness of the judicial process. That principle must be jealously guarded and rigorously applied, especially where evidence which appears to be relevant to a judicial determination is at stake. That cardinal rule not only safeguards the rights of litigants generally but, more importantly, it is fundamental to the public interest in the preservation of our free and democratic society. There are, however, very limited and well-defined occasions where that principle of complete openness must play a secondary role and where, with regard to the admission of evidence, the public interest in not disclosing the evidence may outweigh the public interest in disclosure. This frequently occurs where national security is involved for the simple reason that the very existence of our free and democratic society as well as the continued protection of the rights of litigants ultimately depend on the security and continued existence of our nation and of its institutions and laws."