[10]
I do not agree with the applicant's submission on this matter. My examination of the relevant portions of ss. 38 and 38.1 of the Regulations does not reveal any discretion in this regard on the part of the respondent. Sections 38(1), (2) and (5), and s. 38.1 of the Penitentiary Service Regulations provide as follows:
"38(1) The institutional head of each institution is responsible for the disciplinary control of inmates confined therein.
"(2) Where an inmate commits a disciplinary offence listed in section 39, punishment for the offence may be imposed by
(a) the institutional head or an officer of the Service designated by him; or
(b) a disciplinary court.
"(5) The person referred to in paragraph (2)(a) or the court referred to in paragraph 2(b) shall
(a) determine the innocence or guilt of an inmate based on the evidence presented at the hearing; and
(b) order such punishment referred to in subsections (7), (8) and (9) as he deems suitable.
"38.1(1) The Minister may appoint a person to preside over a disciplinary court.
"(2) The remuneration of a person appointed by the Minister under subsection (1) shall be $250 for each day or portion thereof that he presides over a disciplinary court and $75 per hour up to a maximum of $250 per day for the following other duties that he is required to perform, namely,
(a) participation in information sessions,
(b) participation in orientation and training sessions,
(c) participation in consultation sessions with staff members, union members or inmates, and
(d) appearance before a court in his capacity as president of a disciplinary court in order to reply to proceedings resulting from the discharge of his duties, plus travelling expenses in accordance with the Treasury Board travel directive.
"(3) Where a hearing is conducted by a person appointed by the Minister under subsection (1), the institutional head shall designate one or two officers of the Service with major responsibilities within the institution, who had no direct involvement in the incident giving rise to the hearing, to assist that person during the hearing.
"(4) The officers designated pursuant to subsection (3) shall
(a) provide any details or documents requested by the person appointed by the Minister under subsection (1), and
(b) during the deliberations on the imposition of a punishment, advise the person appointed by the Minister when requested to do so on the most appropriate punishment having regard to administrative constraints and the involvement of the inmate in the various institutional programs,
but the officers shall not otherwise intervene during the hearing unless the person appointed by the Minister requests or authorizes them to do so."