[44]
The respondents attempted to show that rescinding resolutions 64 and 67 would have no legal effect because they were not necessary to start with. More specifically, with respect to resolution 64, they claimed that the Chief had the authority to modify Mr. Sioui’s employment conditions and that this was solely an administrative procedure that did not require the Council’s intervention. I disagree. As with municipalities and schools, the formal procedures set out in the
Indian Act
are a sine qua non condition of a contract’s validity, and the notion of apparent authority cannot be applied herein as where a governmental authority is involved. As Madam Justice Tourigny wrote in
Isolation Sept-Iles Inc. v. Montagnais de Sept-Iles et Maliotenan Indian Band
, supra, at page 57:
"Moreover, courts have unanimously held that non-compliance with formal requirements in municipal and school cases has adverse consequences because they are powers which the Assembly has delegated for the benefit and in the interest of citizens, and such delegated powers can only be exercised within the strict framework the law imposes on them.
"All Indian band councils derive their powers from the same source. Those powers, and the terms and conditions within which they must be exercised, are delegated by the
Indian Act
.
"Section 2(3) of the
Act
clearly requires the consent of a majority of councillors of a band present at a duly convened meeting of the council members, failing which 'a power conferred on the council of a band shall be deemed not to be exercised.' [translation] In addition, the authorization by the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, provided for under ss. 64 and 66 for the expenditure of moneys is also a required formality.
"Also see:
Leonard and the Kamloops Indian Band et al. v. Gottfriedson
, supra;
Conseil de bande des Abénakis de Wôlinak v. Bernard
, [1999] 2 C.N.L.R. 52 (F.C.);
Heron Seismic Services Ltd. v. Muscowpetung Indian Band
, [1991] 2 C.N.L.R. 52 (Sask. Q.B.);
Gilbert v. Abbey
, [1992] 4 C.N.L.R. 21 (S.C.B.C.);
Raine v. Bande Louis Bull (conseil)
, [2000] F.C.J. no 1372 (QL)."