[11]
With respect to the conduct of counsel, there can be no doubt that Mr. MacFarlane was aware of these orders. Having appeared in the first proceeding before Walsh, J., for an interim interlocutory injunction, he subsequently acknowledged service of a copy of the ensuing order. He acted as counsel for, inter alia, O.S. Micro Systems Inc., Lami Yee Lam, and Jack Liu on an appeal from that order. Subsequently, at the time of the continuation of the interlocutory injunction by Giles, A.S.P., on April 21, 1986, it is common ground that the continuation was with the consent of counsel. While it has been held that the mere knowledge by a lawyer of an order having been issued against his client is not necessarily sufficient to establish knowledge by the client for purposes of contempt, in the circumstances of this case it is inconceivable that counsel launched an appeal from one order and subsequently consented to another order without ever having any instructions from his clients. Obtaining of such instructions would clearly involve the clients being aware of the orders made or to be made against them. I am not prepared to believe that Mr. MacFarlane would have acted without instructions from his clients in these matters. Certainly no evidence was presented of such an extraordinary situation. Indeed if court orders were to be subject to frustration by such failure of communication between solicitor and client over such a long period of time it could be necessary, in a proper case, to consider the responsibility of counsel vis-à-vis the orderly administration of justice and the impairment of the authority of the court. (See e.g. Miller, ibid at 226; Borrie and Lowe's Law of Contempt (London, 1983) at 304.) I must conclude then that those of the present respondents represented by Mr. MacFarlane in the earlier proceedings, namely O.S. Micro Systems Inc., Lami Yee Lam, and Jack Liu, were informed not only of the fact of the orders having been issued but of the details of those orders.