[16]
Without going into many details, the evidence shows that prior to the first injunction O.S. Micro Systems Inc. and the individual respondents were selling computers imported from Taiwan which were sold with the model numbers OS23, and OS23D, the latter having a detached keyboard. It was in respect of these computers that the injunction was sought and obtained. Thereafter the respondents continued to sell the same computers, but under such names as 128k and the 128k data. A version of the latter was the 128k data detachable. Exhibit P-49 which had been purchased from O.S. Micro Systems before the injunction, evidence of which had been put before Walsh, J., when he issued that injunction, and Exhibits P-6 and P-52 purchased from Comtex, a successor corporate instrument used by Lam, Liu, and Wu to continue selling such computers, are all of the OS23 or 128k variety with built-in keyboards. Exhibits P-2 and P-3 were identified as of the type sold by O.S. Micro Systems and Comtex as the OS23D or its successor, the 128k data detachable (P-2) with separate keyboard (P-3). Unlike the other computers put in as exhibits, P-2 and P-3 were not themselves clearly proven to have been sold by O.S. Micro Systems or Comtex although they were identified many times as identical to computers sold by those companies. That several hundred of these various computers were imported by O.S. and Comtex (some in the name of Concord) after the first injunction was issued, and distributed by them to dealers continuing well into 1987, was amply evidenced by invoices from the factory to the importers and from O.S. and Comtex to dealers to whom they acted as distributors. This evidence was also corroborated by various inventories of stock of Comtex at relevant times. Evidence as to such sales generally was given by Robert Harris, the former employee of O.S. and Comtex, and was confirmed by a Reggie Ho who joined Comtex in June, 1986 and is still with them. Confirmation of particular sales of significant numbers of such computers was also provided by various of the dealers supplied by O.S. and Comtex. The change from operating under the name of O.S. to that of Comtex did not, in my view, alter anything. While the injunction was issued against O.S. and not Comtex, and against Lam and Liu but not Wu, as noted above the directors of Comtex Micro System Inc. are Lam, Liu and Wu. Because of their continuing close association in the operation of what was essentially the same enterprise with a new corporate name, knowledge of the injunction and its breach, and participation in that breach, must be attributed to both companies and to all three respondents.