[45]
With respect to the remaining individual respondents, Lami Yee Lam, Jack Liu, and Jack Wu, I took a much more serious view of their activities since these involved many hundreds of infringing sales that were carried on over a much longer period of time. There was evidence of elaborate deception practiced by them collectively. These acts constitute a very grave interference with the orderly administration of justice and an impairment of the authority of this court and deserve serious punishment. While their counsel made a general and somewhat limited apology on their behalf, it was certainly less than might have been expected under the circumstances. For these reasons I imposed the maximum fine possible of $5,000.00 on each of them. At the same time I did not consider that these acts constituted what is sometimes described in the jurisprudence and by authors as contempt of a "public" nature. Having regard to this fact, and the fact that none of them appeared to have any criminal records prior to the events associated with violations of these injunctions, I have not imposed any sentence of imprisonment at this time. I have, however, suspended any possible sentencing for imprisonment (apart from the possible imprisonment which I fixed for default in payment of fines) for one year on condition that they obey the outstanding interlocutory injunction and demonstrate to the court that they are obeying it. This appeared to me the more appropriate route having regard to the principle that an important purpose of the contempt power is to bring about compliance with court orders. I included in the conditions for suspension of sentence a requirement of a written apology and an undertaking from each. While I respectfully agree with the Quebec Court of Appeal in Re Ouellet (No. 2) (1976), 72 D.L.R.(3d) 55 (Que. C.A.), that a forced apology is of little value, in this case counsel for the respondents offered such a further apology and I have accepted that offer. Similarly, counsel offered the monthly monitoring by certificate of the company's auditor and I confirmed that obligation. They also offered to put up $100,000.00 security for which I have fixed conditions and a term of one year for which it is to last.