 [6] 
  This letter is not the decision granting leave to appeal. It simply refers to such a decision made by an unnamed member of the Board on September 27, 2010. The decision itself is nowhere to be found in the record. The identity of the member is not disclosed. Other than the handwritten letter from Mr. Montesano previously referred to, there is nothing in the record to show that Mr. Montesano, or someone acting on his behalf, had made any submissions in respect of a request for leave to appeal. It is appreciated that reasons are only required when leave is denied but nowhere is the decision to grant leave itself recorded. However this Court has on several occasions stated that Reasons are required. This Court shares the frustration felt by Mr. Montesano in dealing with the Board. As one example of the Court's expression that reason be given I cite Justice deMontigny in  
 Canada (Attorney General) v Causey, 
  2007 FC 422 at paragraphs 22 to 25 
 : 
 
 
 
 [22] Ms. Causey's application for leave to appeal has not, on its face, disclosed any arguable ground for appeal. The health issues noted in her letter of December 2, 2005, are not stated to have been in existence in December 1994, and are in fact stated to have developed only after the Review Tribunal's decision. Moreover, Ms. Causey's ability to care for her parents throughout the period prior to the appeal indicates she was capable of regularly pursuing substantially gainful employment. That ability would preclude a finding of disability under the CPP. 
 
 
 
 [23] Not only did the Board member not identify an arguable ground of appeal, but he went so far as to say he doubted whether there was an arguable case. Granting leave to appeal in the absence of proper reasons, especially where the Board member questions whether a case is arguable, is an error of law, whatever standard of review is applied: Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development) v. Roy, 2005 FC 1456. 
 
 
 
 [24] I am also of the view that the decision under review must be quashed because the Board failed to provide meaningful reasons. It is true that pursuant to paragraph 83(3) of the CPP, it is only when leave is denied that written reasons must be given. But this Court, following the lead of the Federal Court of Appeal in Canada (Canadian Security Intelligence Service) v. Green, [1993] F.C.J. No. 1369 (F.C.A.) (QL), has found in previous rulings that discretionary decisions must always be supported with reasons: Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development) v. Roy, above, at paragraph 13; Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development) v. Dawdy, 2006 FC 429. 
 
 
 
 [25] It is with much regret that I come to this conclusion. There is no doubt that Ms. Causey has gone through difficult times. Her plight is far from enviable. Not only has her health failed her, but she now finds herself in a most dire situation as a result of caring for her aging parents. But Parliament chose not to grant appeals to the Pension Appeals Board as of right, and the discretion to determine those cases that merit further review must not be exercised by the Board capriciously or arbitrarily. Since neither the law nor the facts of this matter support the Board's decision, this Court is therefore bound to grant the Attorney General's application.