[16]
It is well-settled that in principle an individual must exhaust alternate or internal remedies before applying to the court for a prerogative writ to issue:
Collin v. Attorney General of Canada et al.
(March 9, 1988), Terrebonne 700-36-000016-880 (S.C.). In
Droit administratif
, 3rd Ed., Cowansville, Yvon Blais, 1992, at p. 458, Patrice Garant writes that exhaustion of statutory remedies should be [TRANSLATION] "a golden rule religiously observed by Superior Court judges". There are nevertheless exceptions, as in
Johnston v. Directeur de l'établissement centre régional de réception et al.
, [1995] R.J.Q. 3000 (hereinafter "
Johnston
"), in which the alternate remedy was not adequate. The applicant cited the exception to the general rule described in
Johnston
, a judgment of the Quebec Superior Court. In
Johnston
the case concerned an inmate who was the subject of an involuntary transfer and applied for a writ of habeas corpus without going through the existing internal procedure. The CSC refused to file a preventive security report implicating the applicant in an escape conspiracy. This was a position taken by the CSC on principle. In
Johnston
Béliveau, J., cited at p. 3008
Anderson v. Attorney General of Canada
, April 21, 1995, Montréal 500-36-000097-959 (S.C.), in which Mayrand, J., indicated [TRANSLATION] "that the approach taken by Quebec Superior Court judges as a whole [is] not to intervene when the initial remedies have not been exhausted, unless there is some flagrant departure from or breach of an applicant's constitutional rights" (at pp. 10-11). Applying this rule to the facts of
Johnston
, Béliveau, J., concluded at p. 3011:
[TRANSLATION]
"The undersigned indicated that if these bodies concluded that the applicant had a right to consult the report, it would probably be the subject of an application for habeas corpus ... It is thus clear that the superior courts will have this matter, which is one of principle, before them. The alternate remedy might thus not make settlement possible and have the effect of delaying the outcome of the case. It is thus advisable for this court to assume jurisdiction over the application to avoid the exhaustion of remedies rule being used to exhaust the parties. The court further notes that the question raised is constitutional in nature, that it is a serious question and that in some respects there is no precedent regarding it."
Breach Of Natural
Justice Alleged