[22]
The Board stated the following at page 2 of the decision under appeal:
"1. Where there is no abuse of the immigration process
"Counsel asserts that the definition of 'adopted' should be interpreted in light of the intentions of Parliament to prevent abuse of the immigration process. He explained, but tendered no evidence, that Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) sought to prevent the use of adoptions as a means to successfully sponsor otherwise non-eligible applicants; that the purpose of the 1993 amendments to the definition was to prevent adoptions for immigration purpose.
"Counsel went on to add that the age of the adopted child is one way to determine if the adoption is genuine. For example, if the adopted child is under the age of 13, this can be assumed to be a bona fide adoption. This would be a child in need of parenting, and there would be no abuse of the immigration process.
"I accept that the age of the child at adoption is one factor which may be considered in determining the bona fides of the case, as well as the purpose of the adoption. However I am not persuaded that it is determinative. I note that the 1993 amendments to the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
(the '
Regulations
') do not provide for such a test. Even if I were so persuaded, I have no basis on which to find that 13 is the relevant age. In this case the Applicant was 10 years of age when the adoption was commenced. This is a factor I considered in determining whether the Applicant falls within the family class.
"2. Microscopic examination of the relationship not required
"Counsel for the appellant submits that 'microscopic' examination of the relationship between appellants and their adoptive child is unnecessary to prevent abuse of the immigration process. He posits that compliance with the definition of 'adopted' requires only proof of the existence of a parent and child relationship. He does not propose a test to determine the existence.
"In this regard, the Appeal Division is bound by Federal Court dicta in
Sharma
and
Edrada
, both of which dealt with the definition of 'adopted' prior to its amendment. I note that even prior to adding the elements of a genuine parent and child relationship as well as the immigration purpose to the definition, these decisions of the Federal Court bound the Appeal Division to undertake a factual analysis of the relationship. This issue was also discussed in my decision in
Capiendo
in which counsel raised this same point."
Legislative Framework