[29]
The applicant also submits the following affidavit by Richard Clive Harrison:
"I, Richard Clive Harrison, of the City of Nepean, in the Province of Ontario, MAKE OATH AND SAY AS FOLLOWS:
1. I am a Program Development Officer with the Policy and Program Development Branch of the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission.
2. I have reviewed policy files, from 1961 to the present [1997], of the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission at its headquarters in Hull, Quebec, as well as files of the said Commission and of the former Department of Manpower and Immigration held by the National Archives of Canada with respect to adoption in the immigration context. What follows is information I obtained from the said files.
3. In approximately 1974, a problem came to light, namely persons arriving in Canada for the purpose of being adopted by relatives in the hope of then being landed pursuant to paragraph 31(1)(f) or (g) of the
Immigration Regulations Part I
.
4. Two provinces, Manitoba and Ontario, expressed concerns about this situation. The problem continued into 1976, when the Ministry of Community and Social Services of the Province of Ontario reported that there were approximately 900 sibling adoptions in Ontario in 1975, the vast majority of which were of persons from outside Canada. Very few of these children were said to fall within the class of persons described in paragraph 31(1)(g) because they had not been nominated or placed with an adoption agency; rather one or both parents were usually living overseas and were no worse off materially than any of their compatriots.
5. A sampling of six councillors in a Canada Immigration Centre in the Ontario Region of the Department of Manpower and Immigration over a two week period some time prior to April [illegible] 1976 showed that the six councillors had received a total of 16 applications on behalf of children adopted in Canada. Of these, nine were for siblings, five were for nephews and nieces and two were from putative fathers. Three of the 16 children were under 13 years of age, while 5 had passed their seventeenth birthday. This sampling was thought to be fairly representative of the situation in the Region.
6. It also became obvious that the age of adoption for adopted sons and daughters in the sponsored dependant category of immigrants was used to circumvent the selection process by permitting the adoption and sponsorship of persons who could immediately enter the labour market on arrival. Therefore, a person who should have been assessed as an independent applicant would enter as an adopted son or daughter and avoid the labour market assessment in the selection criteria. This avenue was also open to applicants who could not qualify in the independent category, but could arrange to be adopted. The result was that a movement of unselected, poorly qualified young workers was created.
7. The records indicate that the aim of the Department of Manpower and Immigration and the provinces throughout was to develop regulations to recognize adoptions in the immigration process while preventing abuse. The issue was considered from a number of perspectives, although no thorough statistical study of the problem is recorded as having been made. The underlying concerns were to protect the best interests of children, foster the development of a true parent-child relationship, and prevent abuse of the immigration program. Solutions proposed included requiring a minimum age difference between parent and child, adjusting the age limit for adoption to correspond [illegible].
8. It is against this backdrop that the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
required that sons and daughters be adopted prior to obtaining thirteen years of age to qualify for the benefits enjoyed by sons and daughters qua sons and daughters under the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
. The proposal of age 13 was adopted to prevent the kind of abuse of the immigration program observed.
9. I make this affidavit in respect to an appeal by Gerardo Morzan Decayanon and not for any improper purpose."