[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This matter was heard at Toronto, Ontario, on March 28, 1988. The applicant is seeking to set aside the decision of an immigration officer who refused to favourably consider her for landed immigrant status.
[2]
The applicant is 35 years old, a citizen of Jamaica, and has been a resident of Canada for the past seven years. As she states in her affidavit filed in support of her application:
"5. In 1983 I retained the services of an Immigration Consultant who took me into the Immigration Office in Toronto and following several hearings, my file was transferred for consideration for Permanent Resident Status in Canada under the Administrative Review Project established by the Refugee Claims Backlog Regulations [P.C. 1986-1531]."
[3]
By letter dated January 7, 1987, the applicant was advised by the respondent that she was invited to attend at an interview at the respondent's offices with an immigration officer for a consideration of her case, and that she should bring all relevant documentation with her. The interview took place on January 19, 1987, at which time she was accompanied by her brother.
[4]
The applicant was subsequently advised by letter dated March 2, 1987, that she did not qualify for landed immigrant status and that her application for permanent residence had been refused. The applicant seeks a writ of certiorari quashing the immigration officer's decision and a writ of mandamus directing the officer of the respondent to reprocess the applicant's file in accordance with the provisions of Refugee Claims Backlog Regulations (supra).
[5]
The history and purpose of the Refugee Claims Backlog Regulations (the Regulations) was succinctly reviewed by my brother Mr. Justice Joyal in FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED of his reasons that the Regulations were adopted in order to expeditiously process applications for admission into Canada in a way which effectively suspends conventional immigration policy. The applicant is viewed almost exclusively in terms of his or her successful establishment in Canada or his or her potential to become so established.
[6]
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[7]
The sections of the Regulations which are of concern in this application are 5(1), 5(2) and 7; but more particularly 5(2)(e) and 7:
"5(1) Where a member of the refugee claims backlog makes an application for landing in Canada, an immigration officer, for the purpose of determining whether the member has become successfully established in Canada, shall consider the following factors:
(a) the member's stability in employment in Canada;
(b) the length of time the member has been employed in relation to the time he has spent in Canada;
(c) the frequency of and reasons for changes in employment by the member;
(d) the present income and future income prospects of the member's present employment; and
(e) the member's family obligations.
"(2) Where an immigration officer cannot make a determination in accordance with the factors set out in subsection (1) that the member of the refugee claims backlog has become successfully established in Canada, the immigration officer shall consider the potential of the member to successfully establish himself in Canada on the basis of the following factors:
(a) the member's work history and experience in his country of former residence in an occupation that he is prepared to follow in Canada;
(b) the member's occupational skills that are likely to facilitate his absorption into the Canadian labour market;
(c) the member's educational level and the impact of that level on his employment prospects;
(d) the member's ability to communicate in one of Canada's official languages;
(e) the presence in Canada of a
relative
who is willing and able to provide financial and other assistance to the member while he is establishing himself in Canada;
(f) the member's personal suitability to become successfully established in Canada, based on his adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and similar qualities; and
(g) the member's family obligations.
....
"7(1) Notwithstanding paragraph 6(1) (d), an immigration officer may grant landing to a member of the refugee claims backlog and his dependants if
(a) the member is, with respect to a Canadian citizen or permanent resident who is at least 18 years of age and is residing in Canada at the time an application for landing is made pursuant to s. 3 by the member of the refugee claims backlog,
(i) the spouse,
(ii) the unmarried son or daughter who was less than
(A) 21 years of age on May 21, 1986, and
(B) 23 years of age at the time of the decision of the immigration officer on the application for landing,
(iii) the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother,
(iv) the brother, sister, nephew, niece, grandson or granddaughter who is an orphan, is unmarried and was, on May 21, 1986, under 18 years of age;
(b) the Canadian citizen or permanent resident described in paragraph (a)
(i) has given an undertaking,
(ii) subject to subsection (3), is likely, in the opinion of the immigration officer, to fulfill the undertaking referred to in subparagraph (i), and
(iii) is not in default in respect of any obligations assumed by him under any other undertaking given by him, including an undertaking given under the Immigration Regulations, 1978
.... ."
[8]
The applicant seeks this court's review of the immigration officer's decision by alleging that the officer failed to take into account one of the factors listed in s. 5(2), namely, s. 5(2)(e): "the presence in Canada of a relative willing and able to provide financial and other assistance to the applicant while the latter is establishing herself in Canada". She argues that even though her brother accompanied her to the interview, ready and willing to provide details of financial and other support he could offer his sister, the immigration officer refused to hear from him. This is outlined in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of immigration officer Richmond:
"I did not take into account the brother's ability to sponsor the applicant's landing as he did not come within the family class described in s. 7 of the Regulations and could not therefore provide an undertaking of assistance."
[9]
In my view, the Regulations provide for three ways in which the applicant could have qualified for permanent landing in Canada:
1) Regardless of her actual or potential establishment in Canada, if she had a relative described in s. 7(1)(a) who was prepared to provide and fulfill an undertaking for the financial assistance of the applicant. My reading of the Regulations clearly shows that the applicant cannot succeed under this head. Section 7(1)(a)(iv) permits the consideration of a brother only where the applicant is under 18 on May 21, 1986. In fact, the thrust of s. 7 is primarily to provide entry to persons who are unlikely to have been able to satisfy the requirements in s. 5, or to whom it is inappropriate that such requirements be applied such as minors, or parents and spouses of Canadian residents. In this sense, s. 7 provides an exception to the main purpose of the Regulations which in my view is to allow entry to those persons who are established in Canada at the time of their review, or are likely to become established in this country.
2) Where the immigration officer, pursuant to s. 5(1) has made a determination that the applicant has become successfully established in Canada. Immigration officer Richmond determined that the applicant had not become successfully established in Canada, and this determination was not disputed by the applicant. I see no reason to disturb the immigration officer's finding.
3) Where the immigration officer cannot determine that the applicant has become successfully established in Canada, the officer must consider the potential of the applicant to become so established based on the factors enumerated in s. 5(2).
[10]
The applicant has argued that paragraph 7 of the immigration officer's affidavit (supra) reveals that she failed to take into account the willingness of the applicant's brother to assist her financially in Canada in coming to a decision regarding the applicant's potential for successful establishment in Canada; that compliance with s. 5(2)(e) would be sufficient to qualify. I do not agree.
[11]
The affidavit of the immigration officer indicates that she properly rejected the applicant's brother as a sponsor under s. 7. He was clearly not a person described in s. 7(1).
[12]
Paragraph 6 illustrates that immigration officer Richmond perfectly understood her role under s. 5(2) of the Regulations:
"6. I considered that significant family assistance was available to the applicant as she had lived with her family since her arrival in Canada in 1981. This was not sufficient however, to indicate the potential for establishment in Canada."
[13]
She made a valid determination of the applicant's potential for establishment by examining all seven criteria outlined in s. 5(2). She correctly viewed them cumulatively in order to arrive at a decision. No single factor under s. 5(2) (financial assistance from her brother) would be sufficient to support the applicant's potential for establishment in Canada.
[14]
The applicant had been in Canada since 1981 and had worked intermittently at extremely low paying jobs. The applicant resided rent free with her mother and brothers and sent some money home to Jamaica to support six children, whose father provided no assistance. The immigration officer also reviewed the applicant's education, initiative and language skills. Her affidavit in my opinion shows a balanced and full review of the applicant's potential for establishment in Canada.
[15]
The interplay of paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Richmond affidavit clearly shows that the officer has a correct appreciation of the difference between financial assistance in s. 7, an undertaking which may obviate the need for the applicant to show any potential for establishment in Canada as opposed to the assistance described in s. 5(2)(e). The latter contemplates a temporally limited period, without undertaking, and is no more no less than one of the seven criteria to be considered.
[16]
To give effect to the applicant's argument would interfere with the balance between ss. 5 and 7 and upset the scheme of the Regulations.
[17]
As Associate Chief Justice Jerome stated in Singh v. Minister of Employment and Immigration et al. (1987), 13 F.T.R. 97, a case similar to the one before me, at page 100:
"In view of the discretionary role given officers under the Backlog Regulations, and the merely procedural benefit which they afford an applicant, and because it was clear that other, unchallenged factors had contributed to the officer's conclusion, I found that the arguments raised in that case [Singh (Manpreet) v. Minister of Employment and Immigration (1987), 13 F.T.R. 66 (F.C.T.D.)] would not justify an Order for certiorari."
It should be emphasized that these cases are not a review of the respondent's decisions. It is not for me to consider whether I might have reached a different conclusion from that reached by the immigration officer. Certiorari is an exceptional remedy, discretionary in nature, and is confined to cases in which the decision under review is fundamentally flawed. Nothing in the facts or arguments presented on this application persuades me that such grounds exist.
[18]
This application is therefore dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/blk
[End of document]
