 [10] 
  While the guidelines do not constitute law and are not binding on the Minister and his delegates, they are not to be regarded as insignificant. In this respect, I refer to an excerpt from  
 Legault 
  wherein the Federal Court of Appeal repeated the following comments of the Supreme Court in  
 Suresh 
 : 
 
 
 
 "The Court specified in  
 Baker 
 , supra, that a nuanced approach to determining the appropriate standard of review was necessary given the difficulty in rigidly classifying discretionary and non-discretionary decisions (paras. 54 and 55). The Court also made it clear in  
 Baker 
  that its approach 'should not be seen as reducing the level of deference given to decisions of a highly discretionary nature' (para. 56) and, moreover, that any ministerial obligation to consider certain factors 'gives the applicant no right to a particular outcome or to the application of a particular legal test' (para. 74). To the extent this Court reviewed the Minister's discretion in that case, its decision  
 was based on the ministerial delegate's failure to comply with self-imposed ministerial guidelines 
 , as reflected in the objectives of the  
 Act 
 , international treaty obligations  
 and, most importantly, a set of published instructions to immigration officers 
 . 
 
 
 
 "The passages in  
 Baker 
  referring to the 'weight' of particular factors (see paras. 68 and 73-75) must be read in this context. It is the Minister who was obliged to give proper weight to the relevant factors and none other.  
 Baker does not authorize courts reviewing decisions on the discretionary end of the spectrum to engage in a new weighing process, but draws on an established line of cases concerning the failure of ministerial delegates to consider and weigh implied [page 368] limitations and/or patently relevant factors 
 : see  
 Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission 
 , [1969] 2 A.C. 147 (H.L.);  
 Sheehan v. Ontario (Criminal Injuries Compensation Board) 
  (1974), 52 D.L.R.(3d) 728 (Ont. C.A.);  
 Maple Lodge Farms Ltd. v. Canada 
 , [1982] 2 S.C.R. 2;  
 Dagg 
 , supra, at paras. 111-12, per La Forest, J. (dissenting on other grounds)." (emphasis added)