 [3] 
  The Prothonotary’s reasons for declining to grant Pfizer leave to file its reply affidavit are as follows: 
 
 
 
 In my view, the decision of this Court in Abbott Laboratories et al. v. Minister of Health et al., (2003) 29 C.P.R. (4th) 450; 2003, FC 1512, merely confirms that the jurisprudential criteria for the application of Rule 312 of the Federal Courts Rules also apply to a motion to strike evidence filed in sur-reply pursuant to an order of the Court. It does not affect the binding and authoritative nature of the Court of Appeal’s decision in Atlantic Engraving Ltd. v. Lapointe Rosenstein, (2002) 23 C.P.R. (4th) 5; 2002 FCA 503, which adds to the traditional three part test the requirement that the evidence sought to be adduced not have been available or not having been capable of being brought as part of the Applicant’s case in chief. 
 
 
 
 I agree with the Applicant that the issues upon which it seeks to bring reply evidence are critical, and even central, to the issues in this proceeding. That, however, does not in and of itself suffice to satisfy the application criteria of Rule 312. Indeed, the critical nature of the issues underscores the fact that the evidence was available and known to be relevant at the time the Applicant filed its initial affidavits. The proposed reply affidavit merely states the basis upon which Dr. Husain disagrees with the critique leveled by Dr. Moe against his affidavit in chief. It addresses no new issue raised by Dr. Moe and addresses no issue not already contained in Dr. Husain’s initial affidavit. Much of the content of the proposed reply affidavit is argumentative and can likely be brought to light in cross-examination. On the whole, if such were the kind of reply affidavit contemplated by Rule 312 and its judicial interpretation, then one can expect that for every expert affidavit filed in an NOC proceeding containing a critique of the Applicant’s experts, there would be a permissible reply affidavit for the purpose of refining the argument and rebutting the critique. Such a result would be contrary to the legislative intent that NOC proceedings should be summary in nature and proceeded with expeditiously. 
 
 
 
 In conclusion, I am not satisfied that granting leave to the Applicant to file the proposed reply affidavit would be in the interests of justice or would be of assistance to the Court, nor am I satisfied that the evidence thus proposed to be filed was not available or could not have been brought as part of the Applicant’s evidence in chief. I should add here that my decision does not rest on any alleged prejudice to Apotex if the evidence were allowed. Indeed, I am satisfied that, had leave to file the evidence been granted, it would not have caused any prejudice to Apotex. I am satisfied that, in notice of application proceedings, there is no inherent prejudice to a Respondent in not being the last party to file evidence on any issue. 
 
 