[7]
The visa officer gives the following reasons in her decision:
You do not meet Canada's Immigration selection criteria and therefore do not qualify for immigration to Canada. Any additional units of assessment which may be awarded for the personal suitability factor at an interview would not affect this result. In view of my decision to refuse your application, you will not be called for a personal interview with a visa officer. As explained above, applicants must obtain at least one unit of assessment in each of the factors, occupational factor and experience. You have not demonstrated that you have at least one year of full-time work experience in your intended occupation and thus, receive 0 units of assessment for the experience factor. Subsection 11(1) of the Immigration Regulations, states that an immigrant visa shall not be awarded to an immigrant unless at least one until of assessment is awarded for the experience factor.
You do not meet Canada's Immigration Selection criteria and therefore do not qualify for immigration to Canada. Any additional units of assessment which may be awarded for the personal suitability factor at an interview would not affect this result. In view of my decision to refuse your application, you will not be called for a personal interview with a visa officer. As explained above, applicants must obtain at least one unit of assessment in each of the factors, occupational factor and experience. After a careful review of the information contained in you application, I am not satisfied that you perform a substantial number of duties as described in NOC for your intended occupation. Subsection 11(2) of the Immigration Regulations, states that an immigrant visa shall not be awarded to an immigrant who is not awarded any units of assessment for the occupational factor.
You asked to be assessed as well as a foreman, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanic NOC 7216. I am not satisfied you have experience performing some or a substantial number of the main duties under this occupation and for the reasons discussed above, you application is refused.