[4]
In its Decision, the Board raised several implausibility findings with regard to the Applicant's story. The Respondent submits that several of those findings concerned fundamental facts upon which the Applicant's claim rested. In particular:
(a) The Applicant claimed that after the July 11, 1999 demonstration at Tehran University (in which he participated) he was afraid for his life because security forces personnel were throughout the University and the surrounding area and were arresting people thought to be involved in the demonstration. Nevertheless, the Applicant did not attempt to leave the area, but claimed to have gone to the Toraj bookstore (close to the University) after the demonstration;
(b) The Applicant testified that when he went to the Toraj bookstore after the demonstration the owner advised him to leave the area for his own safety and that he followed that advice. Nevertheless, the Applicant claimed that 3 days later he returned to the bookstore, while the area was still under surveillance, looking for his cousin, even though he and his cousin attended the demonstration separately and were not together during the demonstration;
(c) Considering the reputations of the various security forces involved in the break-up and subsequent investigation of the July 11, 1999 demonstration, and considering the role that the Applicant claimed to have played in that demonstration, the Board found it implausible that he would return to an area so close to where the demonstration had taken place to look for his cousin, who also would have been attempting to avoid arrest and detention;
(d) The Applicant claimed that the authorities had mistreated him for many years and that he spent time in the army. Nevertheless, the Applicant claimed that he was not harassed or assigned difficult tasks in order to punish him for his indifference to the regime. The only "sanction" he experienced was that he was not allowed to carry a weapon while in the military;
(e) The Applicant claimed that in 1994 his co-workers, who were supporters of the Mujaheddin, caused him to be arrested. During his alleged six week detention he claimed that he was severely tortured, physically and psychologically, causing him to be bedridden for three weeks. Furthermore, he claimed from 1993-1998 he was dismissed from each job that he had due to political reasons. Nevertheless, the Applicant claimed that neither he nor his family thought of leaving the country.
ISSUES