[23]
The Respondent counters these arguments by saying that what lies behind these concerns of the Board is the key 1994 incident in relation to which the Applicant testified that, after being tortured, confined and bedridden, he still did not feel he needed to leave Iraq. The relevant portions of the transcript on this issue read as follows:
PRESIDING MEMBER: Okay. Counsel asked you about the '94 incident. And you said you were accused at that time of - just a moment. I have my notes here. That you were told about Masud's sister ...
COUNSEL: No, his father and mother were told about Masud's sister and Masud's father.
PRESIDING MEMBER: In 2000.
COUNSEL: Yeah. The father was told in 2000.
PRESIDING MEMBER: So there are the authority's accusations about 1994.
CLAIMANT: Yes.
PRESIDING MEMBER: Earlier when Counsel was questioning you as to why not leave at that time, I believe and I stand to be corrected, that you said at that time, they had no documents against you.
CLAIMANT: Yes.
PRESIDING MEMBER: And that's somewhat contrary to the Sepa's later - the authority's later statement that there were accusations against you from 1994. Would you explain that?
CLAIMANT: At that time, when I was arrested, it was because Masud and (Inaudible) were not arrested. Later on, when they were arrested, they found out about me.
PRESIDING MEMBER: All right. But it still - the question still remains because you were (inaudible) according to you, tortured during that time. Why would you not think of leaving then?
CLAIMANT: Because at that time, they didn't have anything on me. They were trying to make me to confess.
PRESIDING MEMBER: But that's not the issue though - whether they had something against you or not. The issue is the treatment of you. This sounds like persecution to me. And especially if they have nothing against you.
CLAIMANT: So what do you want me to say?
PRESIDING MEMBER: Why did you not leave - think of leaving then? You have (inaudible) background family background. Your experiences.
CLAIMANT: At that time, I did not feel being at risk 100%. Because regime - it was not clear to the regime that I am - I was a person against the regime. After that, whatever that students' demonstration, I believe that regime was sure that I was against them. And that was the time that I was sure if they ever get hold of me, if they ever arrest me, it's going to be it. And that's why I decided to get out of the country.