[10]
Why? The brothers differ markedly in their explanations. William's testimony on this matter (transcript 3: pp. 335 to 337) is so truculently inconsistent with the "Résumé - Verbal Agreement" (Exhibit 25, p. 2), and so illogical, blowing hot and cold about whether he could take shares and thereby spring the trap of associated corporations, or whether such status mattered nothing, so long as William received his shares, that the court declines to believe him. The version expressed by John is at least consistent, and more probable, and is therefore accepted by the court. It is corroborated by his wife Frances in her testimony as to neither direct share-holding nor indirect beneficial share-holding ever being intended to be accorded to William. Only William's testimony was received as contradiction and it is rejected. No other evidence raises a sustainable or any contradictory evidence against John's version of events. The court accepts this testimony by John, recorded in the transcript, volume 1, at pages 90 to 93 in these passages:
"Q. Okay. Now, do you know why no shares were issued to William?
A. Yes.
Q. What was the reason for that? Or what happened, why?
A. In about January of 1971 when I applied for a corporation, and advised William of that, he advised me, and I believe he came to Penticton to discuss it, and he advised me that he didn't want any shares issued in his name because of what he described the arm's length problem. He referred to that as a tax problem, and therefore he said he didn't want shares issued, and he would like to now change the arrangement, if you will, or the deal. But he would not be a shareholder of Cantex, but that he would share in the earnings of Cantex.
Q. To what extent would he share in the earnings?
A. Well, the extent that he discussed was that we would sort this out down the line, or down the road.
Q. But, were the earnings to be split 80/20, 60/40, 50/50 or what?
A. I think the basis understanding was that they would be split 50/50.
Q. 50/50?
A. Yes.
. . . . .
Q. Mr. Pankiw, I'll show you a register of shareholders of Cantex, showing John Pankiw and Frances Pankiw as shareholders. A share certificate in your name, dated March 11, 1971 for 99 common shares of Cantex, and a share certificate in the name of Frances, also dated March 11, 1971, one share of Cantex. Are those the shares, or copies of the share certificates that you obtained, and is that a true copy of the Register of Shareholders?
A. Yes, they are."
(Copy Re Shareholders Shares, 11 March 1971 [3 Sheets] Marked Exhibit 2)