[26]
At trial the defendant's counsel acknowledged that the Minister seeks no penalties against the plaintiffs and further that insofar as misrepresentation is alleged in order to open the otherwise statute-barred years to reassessment, the defendant alleges no fraud on the plaintiffs' part. The above reasoned finding that there was never any association between the brothers' corporations pursuant to the Income Tax Act, would seem to obviate the need to adjudicate the issue of alleged misrepresentation, under s. 152(4), which "is attributable to neglect, carelessness or wilful default". However, if in other proceedings, it be authoritatively held that there was an association, it will be seen from the evidence tendered and testimony expressed herein that the nonreporting of such an association was and is the absolute antithesis of neglect, carelessness or wilful default. It was a deliberate, thoughtful and bona fide nonreporting. John Pankiw and therefore Cantex knew about such association and indeed reported the same in regard to Paradise. Section 152(4) protects such conduct, and perhaps only such conduct, where the taxpayer thoughtfully, deliberately and carefully assesses the situation as being one in which the law does not exact the reporting of that which the taxpayer bona fide believes does not exist. Otherwise, no meaning can be attributed to the subsection, which clearly does open that avenue of conduct to the taxpayer. In the event that this issue become a matter of moment, and in order, therefore, to avoid multiplicity of proceedings, the court now makes this alternative finding: the plaintiff, in filing its returns for the 1978 to 1983 taxation years inclusive, made absolutely no misrepresentation which is or could be attributable to neglect, carelessness or wilful default in filing those returns or in supplying information under the Act. As noted counsel abandoned any allegation of fraud. It is, accordingly, now held that the Minister lacked jurisdiction to reassess the plaintiff to tax with respect to its 1978 to 1981 taxation years inclusive. The same finding is now made, mutatis mutandis, in regard to the Minister's reassessment to tax in the cases of Paradise Industries Ltd.