 [19] 
  The applicants argue the employment status of Mint employees is within the jurisdiction of the CIRB and that, pursuant to subsection 18(2) of the  
 RCMA 
 , an individual is automatically considered employed within the public service for the purposes of the  
 PSSA 
  beginning the first day she or he is paid full time remuneration. The applicants submit the CIRB made express findings regarding the individual applicants' employment status during the period of time when the individuals were, notionally, independent contractors. Citing the example of Christian Leroux (an individual who the applicants submit was identified in the CIRB decision as employee #20), the applicants emphasize he was found not to be an independent contractor, but instead an employee within the meaning of the  
 Code 
  during the Relevant Period. The applicants emphasize that as no judicial review of the CIRB decision was initiated by the Mint and in light of the terms of the MOU, the Mint obviously agreed that the individual applicants' seniority dates would be altered to reflect their status as full-time Mint employees dating back to their respective dates of hire. The applicants admit that due to the  
 Public Service Employment Act 
 , 
  S.C. 2003, c. 22, an applicant's request for superannuation entitlement may be rejected if the individual was hired through the auspices of a temporary health agency or general contractor. Nevertheless, this is irrelevant in respect of employment by other  
 Code 
 -regulated employers. In this regard, the law clearly demonstrates that the terms of a contract purportedly identifying a person performing services as a "contractor" and not an "employee" ought to be disregarded if the evidence confirms the establishment of an employer/employee relationship. The applicants rely on the Supreme Court of Canada's reasoning in  
 Pointe-Claire 
  to suggest the determination of the employment status of the individual applicants fits squarely within the jurisdiction of the CIRB. As no jurisdictional challenge was ever sought by the Mint, the employment status of the individual applicants is what has already been declared by the CIRB. Insofar as any further "investigation" by the Officer is concerned, the applicants state the matter is effectively res judicata. Further, the applicants argue there is nothing in the  
 PSSA 
  which precludes the use of the  
 Pointe-Claire 
  factors to determine the identity of the true employer for superannuation purposes. Finally, there is nothing in the  
 PSSA 
  which suggests that some employees of a Code-regulated employer, such as the Mint, possess superannuation status while others do not.