[22]
The General Conditions DDS 9076, a printed document of 3 1/2 legal size pages of small type, includes the following clauses relating to termination of the contract by the Crown. The relevant portions of this document are as follows:
"15. Termination, Suspension, Change
(1) The Minister may, by giving notice to the contractor, terminate or suspend the contract as regards all or any part of the work or change the scope of the work or any portion of the work. The contractor shall immediately comply with the requirements of any such notice and in so doing take every reasonable action that will minimize the cost of performing the contract and complying with the notice.
(2) When, as a result of a notice mentioned in subs. (1):
(a) any suspension or change in the scope of the work results in an increase or decrease in the cost directly related to the performance of the contract the price of the contract shall be adjusted by the amount of such increase or decrease in cost; or,
(b) the work or any portion of the work is terminated, the contractor shall be paid a reasonable price for performing any of the work that has been completed at the time of termination and any other cost directly and necessarily incurred as a result of the termination but in no event shall the aggregate of the price paid to date and any amounts payable pursuant to this paragraph exceed the total contract price.
"16. Default
(1) If the contractor is in default in carrying out any of the terms, conditions, covenants or obligations of the contract, or has made a false representation or warranty, or if the contractor becomes bankrupt or insolvent, or has a receiving order made against it, or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or if the contractor takes the benefit of any statute for the time being in force relating to bankrupt or insolvent debtors the Minister may, by giving notice in writing to the contractor, terminate the whole or any part of the contract. Upon the giving of such notice the contractor shall have no claim for any further payment save as hereinafter provided, but shall remain liable to Her Majesty by reason of the default or occurrence upon which such notice was based.
(2) If after notice of termination of the contract under the provisions of subs. (1) of this section, it is determined by the Minister that the default of the contractor is due to causes beyond the control of the contractor, such notice of termination shall be deemed to have been issued pursuant to s. 15 (Termination) of these general conditions and the rights and obligations of the parties hereto shall be governed by that section.
(3) Upon termination of the contract under this section the Minister may require the Contractor to deliver to Her Majesty, in the manner and to the extent directed by the Minister, any work which has not been delivered/performed and accepted prior to such termination. Subject to the deduction of any claim which Her Majesty may have against the contractor arising under the contract or out of the termination Her Majesty shall pay the contractor for all such work delivered/performed pursuant to such direction and accepted by Her Majesty, the cost to the contractor of such work plus the proportionate part of any fee fixed by the said contract and shall pay or reimburse the contractor the reasonable and proper costs to the contractor of all materials, parts or work-in-process delivered to Her Majesty pursuant to such direction, but in no event shall the aggregate of the price paid to date of default and any amounts otherwise payable pursuant to this subs. (3) exceed the total contract price."