 [7] 
  The Commission, in its October 25, 1994 decision in which it decided to deal with the CPAA 1992/1993 complaint states in part: 
 
 
 
 "The Commission has decided, pursuant to ss. 41(a) and 41(d) of the  
 Canadian Human Rights Act 
 , to deal with the complaint because the Commission is satisfied that no other review procedures currently available to the complainant are more appropriate than the complaint process to resolve the complaint and that no bad faith has been demonstrated." 
 
 
 
 From the record and the Commission's decision, it is clear the Commission had its staff report before it (as well as the submissions of the parties) when it made its decision and I infer it was the staff report and the reasons contained therein that formed the basis of the Commission's decision. The Commission was entitled to follow such a process. See  
 Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l'Acadie v. Commission canadienne des droits de la personne et al. 
 , [1989] 2 S.C.R. 879; 100 N.R. 241, in which Sopinka, J., observed that the Commission was entitled by statute to base its conclusion on an investigator's report. He stated at p. 902 [S.C.R.]: 
 
 
 
 "... [I]t is submitted that failure to give reasons is itself a basis for review. Assuming without deciding that this is so in the absence of a statutory requirement to give reasons [citations omitted], in my opinion there is no basis for such review in this case. The appellant was notified that the Commission had decided that the positions which were the subject of comparison did not constitute work of equal value. The basis for this conclusion was the very extensive report of the investigator which the Commission adopted. This, the Commission was entitled by statute to do." 
 
 
 
 Although  
 Syndicat des employés 
  dealt with what is now s. 44 of the  
 Act 
  and the statutory provisions therein, the Commission appears to have followed the same process here under s. 41 [see footnote 2].