 [10] 
  As to bad faith by CPAA, CPC says the CPAA agreed to the arbitration alternative, obtained consideration for withdrawing the 1982 complaint, filed the same complaint in 1992/1993 and, according to CPC, deceived CPC by entering into the 1985 agreement while knowing that the Commission would continue its investigation. With respect to bad faith, the staff reasons state at p. 6: 
 
 
 
 "The settlement to which the respondent (CPC) refers came about and was renewed in a labour relations context, was never approved by the Commission or, after nine years of negotiations, fully implemented. In fact, it proved to be an unsuccessful attempt to resolve a human rights issue through labour relations. That the complainant now seek to avail itself of the complaint process as a means of resolving what it perceives as a current discriminatory situation is not an indication of bad faith." 
 
 
 
 On this issue there is a question of the Commission failing to take account of relevant considerations because, on the basis of the material before me, CPAA's conduct has been, at least, dubious: 
 
 
 
 (1) The 1985 agreement indicates: 
 
 
 
 (a) That the CPAA "acknowledge[d] and agree[d] that certain provisions of the proposed collective agreement ... address[ed], resolve[d] and remed[ied] to the complete satisfaction of the Association the complete substance of the (pay equity) complaint ...". 
 
 
 
 (b) CPAA acknowledged that it had "received independent legal representation throughout". 
 
 
 
 (c) CPAA represented it had withdrawn its human rights complaint. 
 
 
 
 (d) A process including arbitration was agreed to with respect to the development, application and implementation of the job evaluation plan which was to meet the requirements of the  
 Canadian Human Rights Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 (2) In 1991, the CPAA appears to have broken off pay equity negotiations with CPC and did not resort to arbitration for no reason explained in the material before me. CPAA has said that the process failed, but this is only an assertion. An assertion that a process has failed cannot be taken at face value, especially when the party making the assertion was the one to break off negotiations and did not exhaust all the rights available to it. 
 
 
 
 (3) The 1992 complaint was followed by the February 1993 amended complaint couched in some different words than the 1992 complaint. I have a suspicion this was solely for the purpose of countering CPC's argument that the 1992 complaint was the same as the 1982 complaint which was dismissed by the Commission in 1991. It was not satisfactorily explained to me what aspect of pay equity was raised by the 1993 amended complaint that was not contained in the 1992 complaint or indeed in the 1982 complaint.