[2]
The first matter to be considered is whether the time for making the motion should be extended. After a lengthy trial during which a number of important issues both factual and legal involving interpretations of the Copyright Act and the Industrial Design Act were dealt with judgment was rendered in favour of plaintiff for damages and costs on June 14, 1985. This judgment was appealed in the Federal Court of Appeal by both plaintiff and defendant and the judgment of the Court of Appeal was rendered on June 13, 1986 [see (1986), 67 N.R. 139] allowing defendant's appeal on one of the issues raised, which was sufficient to result in the dismissal of plaintiff's action together with costs both in the Court of Appeal and in the Trial Division. During the trial no order was sought for special directions as to costs and normally by application of rule 344(7) an application should have been made within the 10 days specified in rule 337(5) for such special directions including directions contemplated by Tariff B. A strict application of rule 337(5) would actually have required such an application within 10 days after the pronouncement of the trial judgment, although it is perhaps not strictly accurate to state that this is a matter which had been overlooked or accidentally omitted. It is by no means unusual for counsel during the course of argument to overlook asking for a special order with respect to costs and the court cannot be said to have overlooked dealing with this when no such request has been made. However, in view of the importance of the matter and the difficulty of the issues raised it is certainly an application which would have been granted had it been made and discretion is given to the trial judge to extend the time for the application even after the expiration of the delay set forth. Rule 344(7) provides that an application in the Court of Appeal should be made before the Chief Justice or a judge nominated by him. As I have been nominated deputy judge to deal with this matter and, since the judgment of the Court of Appeal provided for the payment of costs to the defendant both in that court and in the court below it would appear to be proper to deal with the matter, since as the judge who heard the action in the first instance, I am familiar with all aspects of the matter.