 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitehead v. Pelican Lake First Nation (2009), 360 F.T.R. 274 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2010] F.T.R. TBEd. JA.020 
 
 
 
 Fred Whitehead and Jimmy Bill (applicants) v. Pelican Lake First Nation, Chief Peter Bill, Gilbert Chamakese, David Thomas, Romeo Thomas and Sydney Bill (respondents) 
 
 (T-368-09; 2009 FC 1270) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Whitehead et al. v. Pelican Lake First Nation et al. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Shore, J. 
 
 December 11, 2009. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The Chief and Council of Pelican Lake First Nation (the respondents) alleged that two councillors (the applicants) improperly obtained possession of confidential Band records and refused to return them. The respondents passed a Band Council Resolution which suspended the applicants for one month, without pay. The RCMP took possession of the missing files. The respondents passed three other Resolutions continuing the suspensions. The suspensions were allowed to expire and the applicants returned to Band Council meetings. The applicants sought judicial review of the four Resolutions. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the application. The court found that the Resolutions were intra vires the Band Council. Further, no evidence had been brought before the court that demonstrated that the Council's decisions were unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 Administrative Law - Topic 3342 
 
 Judicial review - General - Practice - Limitation period - [See first  
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6238 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 4071.3 
 
 Federal Court of Canada - Jurisdiction - Trial Division - Practice - Judicial review applications - Time for - [See first  
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6238 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Courts - Topic 4072 
 
 Federal Court of Canada - Jurisdiction - Federal Court - Practice - Limitation periods - Extension of - [See first  
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6238 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6222 
 
 Government - Band councils (incl. chief and councillors) - Powers - Two councillors of Pelican Lake First Nation (the applicants) sought judicial review of four Band Council Resolutions executed by the Chief and Council temporarily suspending them from their duties without remuneration, for misconduct - The applicants submitted that the Indian Band Council Procedure Regulations did not give Band Councils the authority to suspend councillors - The Federal Court held that the Band Council had the jurisdiction to temporarily suspend the applicants - Band Councils were elected pursuant to one of two sources: the Indian Act and Band custom - The Pelican Lake First Nation did not elect its Council pursuant to s. 74 of the Act, but instead used the Pelican Lake Band Election Act (PLEA) - Therefore, the Regulations did not apply to the Council - Although the PLEA was silent on the power to suspend, courts have held that Chiefs and Band Council could hold customary or inherent powers to suspend councillors - See paragraphs 38 and 39. 
 
 
 
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6222 
 
 Government - Band councils (incl. chief and councillors) - Powers - This was an application for judicial review of four decisions made by the Chief and Council of the Pelican Lake First Nation (the respondents) to temporarily suspend two councillors without remuneration, for misconduct - The respondents argued that a Band custom existed which gave the Council the authority to suspend councillors - The Federal Court agreed - There was evidence showing that a councillor was suspended for misconduct at least once before - In addition, the Council validly passed Guidelines which set out acceptable behaviours for elected officials, in the absence of an express grant of authority under the Pelican Lake Band Election Act (PLEA) - This showed that the PLEA was not an exhausted code - Also, the Council must have the inherent ability to enforce the Guidelines, or else its power to make its own procedures would be ineffectual - See paragraphs 40 to 44. 
 
 
 
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6226 
 
 Government - Band councils (incl. chief and councillors) - Removal (incl. suspension) - Validity - Two councillors (the applicants) sought judicial review of four decisions made by the Chief and Council of the Pelican Lake First Nation (the respondents) to temporarily suspend them without remuneration, for misconduct - The respondents alleged that the applicants improperly obtained possession of confidential Band records and refused to return them, that they used profanity and raised voices at Council meetings and walked out in the middle of the meetings - The RCMP took possession of the missing records - The suspensions were allowed to expire and the applicants returned to Council meetings - The Federal Court dismissed the application - The Chief and Council retained customary and inherent powers when legislation had not "covered the field" of legislative activity with respect to the Band - Although the Pelican Lake Band Election Act did not mention suspensions, "there must be a mechanism of necessity to enforce Band Council legislation" - The Band Council had previously suspended a councillor for misconduct and deference must be afforded to that new, yet acknowledged, custom - The applicants had not demonstrated that the Council had acted in an unreasonable manner - Their misconduct was confirmed by their own sworn admissions - See paragraphs 55 to 57. 
 
 
 
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6238 
 
 Government - Band councils (incl. chief and councillors) - Judicial review - Section 18.1(2) of the Federal Courts Act gave applicants 30 days after a decision was first communicated to file an application for judicial review - In this application, two councillors sought judicial review of four distinct Band Council decisions to temporarily suspend them for misconduct - Each suspension lasted one month - The applicants waited some 90 days to bring the application and asked for a large number of orders - The Federal Court stated that the time limit existed to bring finality to administrative decision-making - In order to obtain a time extension under s. 18.1(2), the applicants "have to show a continuing intention to pursue the application, that the application has some merit, that no prejudice to the respondent arises from the delay, and that a reasonable explanation for the delay exists" - The court duly noted that the applicants had never requested an extension and that no motion or materials were filed to satisfy or explain the delay - See paragraphs 45, 46 and 54. 
 
 
 
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6238 
 
 Government - Band councils (incl. chief and councillors) - Judicial review - Two councillors sought judicial review of four separate orders of the Band Council, temporarily suspending them for misconduct - The Chief and Band Council submitted that the application was inconsistent with rule 302 of the Fedeal Courts Rules; i.e., that a party was generally required to file separate applications for each decision - The Federal Court held that the time and effort of the parties and the court would be conserved by reviewing the decisions in one application - Under normal circumstances, the review of multiple decisions required the filing of multiple applications ("Servier", (2007)) - In contrast, the court in "Truehope" (2004) allowed a judicial review of two decisions to proceed under one application where their similarities outweighed their differences - The case at bar was analogous to Truehope: the requested relief arose out of four decisions of the same decision-maker, operating under the same statute, dealing with similar factual situations and similar forms of relief - See paragraphs 49 to 52. 
 
 
 
 Indians, Inuit and Métis - Topic 6238 
 
 Government - Band councils (incl. chief and councillors) - Judicial review - This was an application for judicial review of decisions made by the Chief and Council to temporarily suspend two councillors without remuneration, for misconduct - The councillors requested an award of punitive damages - The Federal Court rejected the request - "It is well-known that the Federal Court has no jurisdiction to grant damages on an application for judicial review" - See paragraph 53. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
 Bill et al. v. Pelican Lake Band Appeal Board et al. (2006), 357 N.R. 314; 154 A.C.W.S.(3d) 259; 2006 FCA 397, refd to. [para. 2]. 
 
 Lafond v. Muskeg Lake Cree Nation et al. (2008), 330 F.T.R. 60; 2008 FC 726, refd to. [para. 22]. 
 
 Prince et al. v. Sucker Creek First Nation (2008), 337 F.T.R. 1; 2008 FC 1268, appld. [para. 22]. 
 
 Human Rights Institute of Canada et al. v. Goldie et al., [2000] 1 F.C. 475; 176 F.T.R. 225 (T.D.), refd to. [para. 32]. 
 
 Human Rights Institute of Canada v. Canada (Minister of Public Works and Government Services) - see Human Rights Institute of Canada et al. v. Goldie et al. 
 
 Richardson (James) International Ltd. v. Canada et al., [2005] 2 F.T.R. 534; 263 F.T.R. 82; 2004 FC 1577, refd to. [para. 33]. 
 
 Richardson (James) International Ltd. v. Canada et al., [2007] 1 F.C.R. 83; 351 N.R. 312; 2006 FCA 180, refd to. [para. 33]. 
 
 New Brunswick (Board of Management) v. Dunsmuir, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190; 372 N.R. 1; 329 N.B.R.(2d) 1; 844 A.P.R. 1; 2008 SCC 9, refd to. [para. 35]. 
 
 Francis et al. v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake et al., [2003] 4 F.C. 1133; 227 F.T.R. 161; 2003 FCT 115, refd to. [para. 37]. 
 
 Budisukma Puncak Sendirian Berhad et al. v. Canada et al. (2005), 338 N.R. 75; 141 A.C.W.S.(3d) 692; 2005 FCA 267, refd to. [para. 45]. 
 
 Virdi v. Minister of National Revenue, [2005] F.T.R. Uned. 353; 138 A.C.W.S.(3d) 1058; 2005 FC 529, affd. [2006] N.R. Uned. 29; 145 A.C.W.S.(3d) 1021; 2006 FCA 38, refd to. [para. 46]. 
 
 Sander Holdings Ltd. et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) et al. (2006), 289 F.T.R. 221; 2006 FC 327, refd to. [para. 46]. 
 
 Hamilton-Wentworth (Regional Municipality) v. Canada (Minister of the Environment) et al. (2000), 187 F.T.R. 287; 96 A.C.W.S.(3d) 405 (T.D.), refd to. [para. 47]. 
 
 Servier Canada Inc. et al. v. Canada (Minister of Health) et al., [2007] F.T.R. Uned. 100; 155 A.C.W.S.(3d) 664; 2007 FC 196, dist. [para. 50]. 
 
 Truehope Nutritional Support Ltd. et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) et al. (2004), 251 F.T.R. 155; 2004 FC 658, appld. [para. 51]. 
 
 Al-Mhamad v. Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission et al., [2003] N.R. Uned. 2; 120 A.C.W.S.(3d) 351; 2003 FCA 45, refd to. [para. 53]. 
 
 
 
 Statutes Noticed: 
 
 Federal Courts Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, sect. 18.1(2) [para. 45]. 
 
 Federal Courts Rules, rule 302 [paras. 32, 49]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Brent M. Ilingworth, for the applicants; 
 
 Anil K. Pandila and Keith Amyotte, for the respondents. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Lindgren, Blais, Frank & Illingworth, North Battleford, Saskatchewan, for the applicant; 
 
 Pandila & Co., Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application for judicial review was heard at Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, on December 5, 2009, by Shore, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment and reasons for judgment, dated December 11, 2009. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I.  
 Overview 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Shore, J. 
 : The Court acknowledges its respect for the internal procedures, customs, traditions and operations of indigenous Band Councils; and, thereby, defers to  
 authoritative 
  council decisions emanating from leadership of constituent indigenous communities. 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Introduction 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The Court recognizes a Band Council's powers to suspend councillors for misconduct and violations of Band legislation pursuant to an inherent legal authority and customary right. 
 
 
 
 A meaningful legal right to legislate cannot exist without a legal remedy to sanction offenders. Band legislation cannot be violated with impunity. 
 
 
 
 The doctrine of necessity has been previously recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada. The Federal Court of Appeal has referred to the doctrine of necessity in  
 Bill et al. v. Pelican Lake Band Appeal Board et al. 
  (2006), 357 N.R. 314; 154 A.C.W.S.(3d) 259; 2006 FCA 397: 
 
 
 
 "[8] In my view, in these circumstances, the doctrine of necessity applies. In  
 Sparvier v. Cowessess Indian Band 
 , [1993] 3 F.C. 142, at page 172-173, Rothstein, J., of the Federal Court (as he then was) wrote: 
 
 
 
 'The doctrine of necessity arises in cases in which, when no one else is empowered to act, otherwise disqualified tribunal members ... may be qualified to hear and determine an appeal. The principle is stated in  
 Administrative Law 
  by Sir William Wade, 6th ed., 1988 at page 478: 
 
 
 
 "In all the cases so far mentioned the disqualified adjudicator could be dispensed with or replaced by someone to whom the objection did not apply. But there are many cases where no substitution is possible, since no one else is empowered to act. Natural justice then has to give way to necessity; for otherwise there is no means of deciding and the machinery of justice or administration will break down."'" 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Judicial Procedure 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  This is an application for judicial review of four decisions made by the Chief and Council of the Pelican Lake First Nation (PLFN) to temporarily suspend Councillors Fred Whitehead and Jimmy Bill (the Applicants) from their duties without remuneration. 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Background 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  On March 9, 2007, the Applicants were elected as PLFN Councillors. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  In July 2008, the Applicants obtained possession, the Respondents allege improperly, of confidential Band records and, the Respondents allege, improperly disseminated the information in those records to the public (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 6). 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  At the Band Council meeting of November 17-18, 2008, the Council directed the Applicants to return the records. The Respondents allege that the Applicants refused to do so, became disruptive and walked out of the meeting (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at paras. 7, 8). 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The Respondents allege the Applicants received notice of the Band Council meeting scheduled for December 12, 2008 and chose not to attend. At that meeting, the Chief and Council passed a Band Council Resolution (BCR) which suspended the Applicants for the month of December, without pay, and requested the assistance of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) to recover the missing files (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 9). 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The RCMP took possession of the missing files in January 2009. The Applicants allege the files were voluntarily returned to the RCMP (Affidavit of Fred Whitehead at para. 11), while the Respondents claim the files were seized from the Applicants (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 10). 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Applicants attended the Band Council meeting on January 31, 2009. At that meeting, the Chief and Council consulted with Band Elders regarding the Applicants' suspension. The Applicants refused to participate further in the meeting and walked out. In their absence, a BCR was passed suspending the Applicants for the month of January 2009 (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 11). 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The next Band Council meeting was held on February 27, 2009. The Applicants were initially in attendance, but walked out after demanding payment of their monthly honoraria which were being withheld as a result of the suspensions (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 12). In their absence, the Chief and Council passed a motion suspending the Applicants for the month of February 2009. A BCR to this effect was executed on March 10, 2009 (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 11). 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  The Chief and Council passed another BCR continuing the suspensions for March of 2009 (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 13). The suspensions were allowed to expire in April of 2009 and the Applicants returned to Band Council meetings at that time (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 14). 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  (1) Does the Band Council have jurisdiction to temporarily suspend the Applicants? 
 
 
 
 (2) Is this application inconsistent with section 18.1(2) of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
 , R.S.C., 1985, c. F-7 and Rule 302 of the  
 Federal Courts Rules 
 , SOR/98-106? 
 
 
 
 (3) Are the remedies requested by the Applicants appropriate in an application for judicial review? 
 
 
 
 VI.  
 Decisions under Review 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The Applicants seek judicial review of four Band Council Resolutions executed by the Respondents temporarily suspending the Applicants for misconduct. 
 
 
 
 VII.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The Applicants submit that in order for the Band Council to be able to suspend councillors, the power to do so must be given to it in either the  
 Indian Band Council Procedure Regulations 
 , C.R.C., c. 950 ( 
 IBCPR 
 ), or in the  
 Pelican Lake Band Election Act 
  ( 
 PLEA 
 ) (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 9). 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  The Applicants submit that every Band Council is governed by the  
 IBCPR 
  and the  
 IBCPR 
  do not give Band Councils the authority to suspend councillors (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at paras. 10, 11). 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The Applicants anticipate the Respondents' argument that a PLFN custom exists which gives the Council the authority to suspend councillors and submit that the onus falls on the Respondents to prove that such a custom exists (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 24). The Applicants submit that none of the evidence presented establishes a band custom which allows for suspensions (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at paras. 21). 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The Applicants submit that Regulation 31 of the  
 IBCPR 
  states that bands may make procedures for band council meetings as long as those procedures are not inconsistent with the  
 IBCPR 
  (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 25). The Applicants note that Regulation 23 states that band council meetings shall be open to all members of the band and a member can only be excluded from a single meeting if that member causes a disturbance; therefore, the Applicants' submit the Band Council cannot suspend councillors because it would be inconsistent with Regulations 31 and 23 (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at paras. 26 and 27). 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Applicants submit that the Band Council does not have the power to suspend because the  
 PLEA 
  does not give the Band Council the jurisdiction to do so. Section 15 of the  
 PLEA 
  only gives the Council the power to remove a councillor and is silent on the power to suspend (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 31). 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  The Respondents submit the appropriate standard of review to determine whether the Band Council has the jurisdiction to temporarily suspend councillors is correctness; however, once the Court finds that the Council has jurisdiction, the standard of review is reasonableness (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 7). 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The Respondents take issue with the Applicants' submissions that the powers of the Band Council must be found in legislation. The Respondents submit that the  
 IBCPR 
  do not apply to the PLFN Band Council because section 2 of the  
 IBCPR 
  limits the application of those Regulations to band councils elected pursuant to section 74 of the  
 Indian Act 
 , R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5, and the PLFN elects its Council pursuant to the  
 PLEA 
  (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 8). 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  The Respondents submit that the grounds for removal of councillors listed in section 15 of the  
 PLEA 
  do not preclude the Band Council from suspending councillors (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 9). 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  The Respondents submit that that if the  
 PLEA 
  does not restrict the power of the Band Council, the Council retains its inherent jurisdiction to develop its own regulatory policies and procedures. The Respondents cite the cases of  
 Lafond v. Muskeg Lake Cree Nation et al.  
 (2008), 330 F.T.R. 60; 2008 FC 726, at paragraphs 10 and 11, and  
 Prince et al. v. Sucker Creek First Nation 
  (2008), 337 F.T.R. 1; 2008 FC 1268, at paragraphs 29 to 33, for the proposition that a Chief can retain customary powers and can have the authority to suspend councillors where legislation has not "covered the field". 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  The Respondents also submit that the Chief and Council of the PLFN possess the customary authority to discipline councillors (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 10). This authority is based on previous instances of the Council suspending councillors for misconduct. The Respondents submit that the legitimacy of this power was endorsed by a PLFN Committee of Elders (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 11). 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  The Respondents also submit that the Band Council has established policies and legislation, such as the  
 Conflict of Interest Guidelines for Chief and Council 
  ( 
 Guidelines 
 ), which set out acceptable behaviours for elected officials. The Respondents submit that if a government has the power to pass legislation, such as the  
 Guidelines 
 , then it also has the power to enforce that legislation. Also, the legislation in question does not set out sanctions for breach and, therefore, the  
 Guidelines  
 leave the Band Council's disciplinary authority untouched (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 11). 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  In the alternative, the Respondents submit that if the Court does not recognize the Council's inherent powers to suspend councillors for misconduct and violations of Band legislation, such powers must exist because there is no other Band authority in a position to enforce Band policy and legislation.  
 The Respondents cite the case of  
 Bill v. Pelican Lake Appeal Board 
 , above, where the Federal Court of Appeal recognized the Doctrine of Necessity in cases when no other body is empowered to enforce a law (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at pp. 11 and 12). 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  The Respondents submit that the Applicants were suspended for personal misconduct, including violations of their Oaths of Office, sworn pursuant to section 13 of the  
 PLEA 
 , and Disclosure, sworn pursuant to Section VI, sub-section 3 of the  
 Guidelines 
 , as well as behaviour contrary to principles of conduct set out in the Guidelines (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 12). 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  The Respondents submit that the Band Council found as a matter of fact that the Applicants engaged in behaviour that was inconsistent with their Oaths and PLFN legislation (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 14). 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  The Respondents submit that the remedies sought by the Applicants are improper. In regard to the Applicants' request for an award of punitive damages, the Respondents submit that this Court has no jurisdiction to award damages in an application for judicial review (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 15). 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  The Respondents further submit that the Injunctions and Writs of Mandamus requested by the Applicants are improper, as they would engage this Court in dictating Band Council policy and procedure for the PLFN (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 16). 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  The Respondents submit that this Application violates subsection 18.1(2) of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
 , which gives a party thirty days after a decision to make an application for judicial review. The Respondents note that the Notice of Application in these proceedings is dated March 11, 2009 and seeks judicial review of a December 12, 2008 Band Council Resolution (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 17). 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  The Respondents also submit that a motion is required to obtain a time extension and none was requested in this case. Also, the Applicants have not filed materials to explain the delay in making this application (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 17). 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  The Respondents submit that this Application seeks judicial review of four Band Council Resolutions and this is inconsistent with Rule 302 of the  
 Federal Courts Rules 
 . The Federal Court in  
 Human Rights Institute of Canada et al. v. Goldie et al. 
 , [2000] 1 F.C. 475; 176 F.T.R. 225 (T.D.), held that a judicial review relates to only one decision and a party is generally required to file separate applications for each decision for which a review is sought (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at p. 18). 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  The Respondents submit that this Application seeks judicial review of several decisions in an attempt to overcome subsection 18.1(2) of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
  and cite the case of  
 Richardson (James) International Ltd. v. Canada et al. 
 , [2005] 2 F.T.R. 534; 263 F.T.R. 82; 2004 FC 1577, at paragraph 22, for the proposition that an Order under Rule 302 can be refused where it would allow an applicant to overcome the 30-day limitation period mandated by subsection 18.1(2). It should be noted that the Federal Court of Appeal varied  
 James Richardson 
  in the case of  
 Richardson (James) International Ltd. v. Canada et al. 
 , [2007] 1 F.C.R. 83; 351 N.R. 312; 2006 FCA 180; however, on other grounds. 
 
 
 
 Standard of Review 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  The Applicants allege that the Band Council does not have the jurisdiction to temporarily suspend councillors. In  
 Prince 
 , above, Justice Michael Kelen held that the standard of review on questions of Band Council jurisdiction is correctness ( 
 Prince 
  at para. 21). 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  In the case of  
 New Brunswick (Board of Management) v. Dunsmuir 
 , [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190; 372 N.R. 1; 329 N.B.R.(2d) 1; 844 A.P.R. 1; 2008 SCC 9, the Supreme Court of Canada held that correctness mandates the reviewing Court to undertake its own analysis of the question. The Court is not to be deferential to the agency's reasoning, but rather is to question whether the agency's decision was correct ( 
 Dunsmuir 
  at para. 50). 
 
 
 
 Relevant Legislative Provisions 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  The parties' submissions mention section 2 of the  
 IBCPR 
  and section 74 of the  
 Indian Act 
 : 
 
 
 
 " 
 2. 
  In these Regulations, 
 
 
 
 'Assistant Deputy Minister' means the Assistant Deputy Minister, Indian and Eskimo Affairs of the Department; ( 
 sous-ministre adjoint 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'council' means the council of a Band elected pursuant to section 74 of the Indian Act; ( 
 conseil 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'Department' means the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development; ( 
 ministère 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'Minister' means the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development; ( 
 ministre 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'secretary' means the person appointed by the council of a band to record the minutes of the council meetings; ( 
 secrétaire 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'superintendent' means the Superintendent or Senior Field Officer of the Indian Affairs Branch in charge of the Agency, and includes the Indian Commissioner for British Columbia, all Regional Supervisors, all Assistants Indian Agency, and any other officer acting under the instructions of the Minister or the Assistant Deputy Minister. ( 
 surintendant 
 ) 
 
 
 
 Elected councils 
 
 
 
 " 
 74. 
 
  (1) Whenever he deems it advisable for the good government of a band, the Minister may declare by order that after a day to be named therein the council of the band, consisting of a chief and councillors, shall be selected by elections to be held in accordance with this Act. 
 
 
 
 Composition of council 
 
 
 
 "74(2) Unless otherwise ordered by the Minister, the council of a band in respect of which an order has been made under subsection (1) shall consist of one chief, and one councillor for every one hundred members of the band, but the number of councillors shall not be less than two nor more than twelve and no band shall have more than one chief. 
 
 
 
 Regulations 
 
 
 
 "74(3) The Governor in Council may, for the purposes of giving effect to subsection (1), make orders or regulations to provide 
 
 
 
 (a) that the chief of a band shall be elected by 
 
 
 
 (i) a majority of the votes of the electors of the band, or 
 
 
 
 (ii) a majority of the votes of the elected councillors of the band from among themselves, 
 
 
 
 but the chief so elected shall remain a councillor; and 
 
 
 
 (b) that the councillors of a band shall be elected by 
 
 
 
 (i) a majority of the votes of the electors of the band, or 
 
 
 
 (ii) a majority of the votes of the electors of the band in the electoral section in which the candidate resides and that he proposes to represent on the council of the band. 
 
 
 
 Electoral sections 
 
 
 
 "74(4) A reserve shall for voting purposes consist of one electoral section, except that where the majority of the electors of a band who were present and voted at a referendum or a special meeting held and called for the purpose in accordance with the regulations have decided that the reserve should for voting purposes be divided into electoral sections and the Minister so recommends, the Governor in Council may make orders or regulations to provide for the division of the reserve for voting purposes into not more than six electoral sections containing as nearly as may be an equal number of Indians eligible to vote and to provide for the manner in which electoral sections so established are to be distinguished or identified. 
 
 
 
 R.S., c. I-6, s. 74." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 " 
 2. 
  Dans le présent règlement, 
 
 
 
 'conseil' s'entend du conseil d'une bande élu conformément à l'article 74 de la Loi sur les Indiens; ( 
 Council 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'ministère' signifie le ministère des Affaires indiennes et du Nord canadien; ( 
 Department 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'ministre' désigne le ministre des Affaires indiennes et du Nord canadien; ( 
 Minister 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'secrétaire' s'entend de la personne désignée par le conseil d'une bande pour tenir les procès-verbaux des assemblées de Conseil; ( 
 Secretary 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'sous-ministre adjoint' désigne le sous-ministre adjoint (Affaires indiennes et esquimaudes) du ministère; ( 
 Assistant Deputy Minister 
 ) 
 
 
 
 'surintendant' signifie le surintendant ou le fonctionnaire local principal de la Division des affaires indiennes qui a la direction de l'agence, et comprend le commissaire des Indiens pour la Colombie-Britannique, tous les surveillants régionaux, tous les aides des agences indiennes et tout autre fonctionnaire agissant sous l'ordre du ministre ou du sous-ministre adjoint. ( 
 superintendent 
 ) 
 
 
 
 Conseils élus 
 
 
 
 " 
 74. 
  (1) Lorsqu'il le juge utile à la bonne administration d'une bande, le ministre peut déclarer par arrêté qu'à compter d'un jour qu'il désigne le conseil d'une bande, comprenant un chef et des conseillers, sera constitué au moyen d'élections tenues selon la présente loi. 
 
 
 
 Composition du conseil 
 
 
 
 "74(2) Sauf si le ministre en ordonne autrement, le conseil d'une bande ayant fait l'objet d'un arrêté prévu par le paragraphe (1) se compose d'un chef, ainsi que d'un conseiller par cent membres de la bande, mais le nombre des conseillers ne peut être inférieur à deux ni supérieur à douze. Une bande ne peut avoir plus d'un chef. 
 
 
 
 Règlements 
 
 
 
 "74(3) Pour l'application du paragraphe (1), le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des décrets ou règlements prévoyant: 
 
 
 
 a) que le chef d'une bande doit être élu: 
 
 
 
 (i) soit à la majorité des votes des électeurs de la bande, 
 
 
 
 (ii) soit à la majorité des votes des conseillers élus de la bande désignant un d'entre eux, 
 
 
 
 le chef ainsi élu devant cependant demeurer conseiller; 
 
 
 
 b) que les conseillers d'une bande doivent être élus: 
 
 
 
 (i) soit à la majorité des votes des électeurs de la bande, 
 
 
 
 (ii) soit à la majorité des votes des électeurs de la bande demeurant dans la section électorale que le candidat habite et qu'il projette de représenter au conseil de la bande. 
 
 
 
 Sections électorales 
 
 
 
 "74(4) Aux fins de votation, une réserve se compose d'une section électorale; toutefois, lorsque la majorité des électeurs d'une bande qui étaient présents et ont voté lors d'un référendum ou à une assemblée spéciale tenue et convoquée à cette fin en conformité avec les règlements, a décidé que la réserve devrait, aux fins de votation, être divisée en sections électorales et que le ministre le recommande, le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des décrets ou règlements stipulant qu'aux fins de votation la réserve doit être divisée en six sections électorales au plus, contenant autant que possible un nombre égal d'Indiens habilités à voter et décrétant comment les sections électorales ainsi établies doivent se distinguer ou s'identifier. 
 
 
 
 S.R., ch. I-6, art. 74." 
 
 
 
 Does this Court have jurisdiction to review the decisions of the PLFN Band Council? 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  It is settled law that a Band Council is a federal "board, commission or other tribunal" for the purposes of section 18 of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
  and their decisions are subject to review by this Court ( 
 Francis et al. v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake et al. 
 , [2003] 4 F.C. 1133; 227 F.T.R. 161; 2003 FCT 115 at para. 16). 
 
 
 
 Issue 1: 
   
 Does the Band Council have jurisdiction to temporarily suspend the Applicants? 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  Band Councils are elected pursuant to one of two sources: the  
 Indian Act 
  and Band custom. The  
 IBCPR 
  apply to a Council if, and only if, the Band Council is elected pursuant to section 74 of the  
 Indian Act 
 . The PLFN does not elect its Council pursuant to section 74, but instead uses the  
 PLEA 
 ; therefore, the  
 IBCPR 
  do not apply to it. 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  The Applicants also submit the Council's authority to suspend councillors must be provided for in the  
 PLEA 
  or else the Council has acted ultra vires (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 33). Section 15 of the  
 PLEA 
  gives the Council the power to remove councillors, but the legislation is silent on temporary suspensions. Although this power is not mentioned in the  
 PLEA 
 , courts have held that Chiefs and Band Councils can hold customary or inherent powers to suspend councillors. 
 
 
 
 Does a Band Custom Exist Allowing the Chief and Council to Suspend Members? 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  The Court in  
 Francis 
 , above, held that it is incumbent upon the party claiming "custom" to establish that it exists ( 
 Francis 
  at para. 21). The jurisprudence shows that "customs" are practices "which are generally acceptable to members of the band upon which there is broad consensus" ( 
 Prince 
 , above, at para. 28). 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  In the case of  
 Lafond 
 , above, a councillor was suspended by the Chief in response to the councillor's alleged misconduct. Although the Chief was not granted the power to suspend councillors in the 
   
 Act 
  Respecting the Government Elections and Related Regulations of the Muskeg Lake Cree Nation 
 , the Court held the Chief retained customary powers where Band legislation had not "covered the field" ( 
 Lafond 
  at para. 10). These powers were rooted in band custom to encourage harmony in the community ( 
 Lafond 
  at para. 11). 
 
 
 
 [42] 
  In  
 Prince 
 , the Court determined that a Band Council had the customary authority to suspend councilors ( 
 Prince 
  at para. 25). The applicants submitted that the Council did not have the power to suspend councilors because the Council's customary election statute only made provision for the removal of councilors ( 
 Prince 
  at para. 25). In reply, the respondents submitted it was the custom of the Sucker Creek Nation to allow the Chief and Council to suspend Councilors for misconduct ( 
 Prince 
  at para. 27). The Court held that the Council held customary powers, such as the power to suspend councilors ( 
 Prince 
  at para. 31). 
 
 
 
 [43] 
  The reasoning in  
 Prince 
  applies to the case at bar. In this case, there is evidence before the Court showing that a councilor was suspended for misconduct at least once before (Respondents' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 16). 
 
 
 
 [44] 
  In addition, the PLFN Band Council validly passed the  
 Guidelines  
 in the absence of an express grant of authority under the  
 PLEA 
 . This shows that the  
 PLEA 
  is not an exhaustive code. Also, the Band Council must have the inherent ability to enforce its policies, such as the  
 Guidelines 
 , or else the Council's power to make its own procedures would be ineffectual. 
 
 
 
 Issue 2: 
   
 Is this application inconsistent with subsection 18.1(2) of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
  and Rule 302 of the  
 Federal Courts Rules 
 ? 
 
 
 
 [45] 
  Subsection 18.1(2) of the  
 Federal Courts Act 
  gives applicants thirty days after the decision was first communicated to file an application for judicial review of the decision of a federal tribunal. In the case of  
 Budisukma Puncak Sendirian Berhad et al. v. Canada et al. 
  (2005), 338 N.R. 75; 141 A.C.W.S.(3d) 692; 2005 FCA 267, the Court held that this time limit exists to bring finality to administrative decision-making ( 
 Berhad 
  at para. 60). 
 
 
 
 [46] 
  Subsection 18.1(2) provides that a judge of the Federal Court may extend this time, either before or after the expiration of those thirty days, but in order to obtain a time extension, the Applicants have to show a continuing intention to pursue the application, that the application has some merit, that no prejudice to the respondent arises from the delay, and that a reasonable explanation for the delay exists ( 
 Virdi v. Minister of National Revenue 
 , [2005] F.T.R. Uned. 353; 138 A.C.W.S.(3d) 1058 at para. 7; 2005 FC 529, affd. [2006] N.R. Uned. 29; 145 A.C.W.S.(3d) 1021; 2006 FCA 38). In the case of  
 James Richardson 
 , above, at paragraph 33, the Federal Court of Appeal held that these four requirements are not conjunctive, but must all be considered. The essence of the four-part test was distilled by Justice Conrad von Finckenstein in  
 Sander Holdings Ltd. et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) et al. 
  (2006), 289 F.T.R. 221; 2006 FC 327, at paragraph 34, where it was held the applicant bears the burden of proving the delay was reasonable. 
 
 
 
 [47] 
  In the case of  
 Hamilton-Wentworth (Regional Municipality) v. Canada (Minister of the Environment) et al. 
  (2000), 187 F.T.R. 287; 96 A.C.W.S.(3d) 405 (T.D.), Justice Eleanor Dawson held that any issue of the application of a time bar ought to be heard at the hearing of the application ( 
 Hamilton 
  at para. 39). 
 
 
 
 [48] 
  Since this issue should be addressed by the Applicants, the only remaining comment to be made is in regard to the reasonableness of the delay. The application before the Court requests a review of four distinct decisions to suspend the Applicants. Each suspension lasted for a month, with new BCRs being executed based on the Applicants' alleged behaviour. The Applicants waited until long after the limitation period expired to bring this claim and ask for a large number of orders when they could have brought a succinct claim within the limitation period. 
 
 
 
 [49] 
  Rule 302 of the  
 Federal Courts Rules 
  provides that an application for judicial review shall be limited to a single order of a federal tribunal, unless the Court orders otherwise. 
 
 
 
 [50] 
  The Applicants petition this Court to review four separate orders of the PLFN Band Council. Under normal circumstances, the review of multiple decisions requires the filing of multiple applications FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED; however, courts have exercised their discretion to allow multiple orders to be reviewed under one application when the orders form part of a "continuous course of conduct" ( 
 Servier 
  at para. 17). 
 
 
 
 [51] 
  In  
 Servier 
 , the Court held the applicants were in contravention of Rule 302 because they applied for judicial review of two decisions made at different times, under different statutory regimes, relating to different factual situations and sought two different types of relief ( 
 Servier 
  at para. 18). In contrast, in the case of  
 Truehope Nutritional Support Ltd. et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) et al. 
  (2004), 251 F.T.R. 155; 2004 FC 658, the Court allowed a judicial review of two decisions to proceed under one application because both decisions originated from the same office, both had the same factual basis and the same allegations were made in respect of both proceedings ( 
 Truehope 
  at para. 18). The Court in  
 Truehope 
  held that the similarities in the decisions outweighed their differences and, as such, it would be a waste of time and effort to require more than one judicial review ( 
 Truehope 
  at para. 19). 
 
 
 
 [52] 
  The case at bar is distinguishable from  
 Servier 
  and analogous to  
 Truehope 
  because the Applicants request relief arising out of four decisions of the same decision-maker, operating under the same statute, dealing with similar factual situations and seek similar forms of relief. In addition, the Applicants' submissions deal solely with whether the PLFN Band Council has the jurisdiction to suspend councillors and since, in law, these four decisions are identical, the time and effort of the parties to this application and the Federal Court would be conserved by reviewing these decisions in one application. 
 
 
 
 Issue 3: 
   
 Are the remedies requested by the Applicants appropriate in an application for judicial review? 
 
 
 
 [53] 
  The Applicants make a request for an award of punitive damages (Applicants' Memorandum of Fact and Law at para. 42). It is well-known that the Federal Court has no jurisdiction to grant damages on an application for judicial review ( 
 Al-Mhamad v. Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission et al. 
 , [2003] N.R. Uned. 2; 120 A.C.W.S.(3d) 351; 2003 FCA 45 at para. 3). Accordingly, this Court rejects the Applicants' request. 
 
 
 
 VIII.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [54] 
  It is duly noted that the Applicants had never requested a delay beyond the time period stated in the Federal Courts Rules in respect of a request for judicial review. In  
 Virdi 
 , above, it was held that a party seeking an extension bears the burden of establishing the elements necessary for an extension. This is done by affidavit evidence sworn by the moving party; it can then be subject to cross examination. No motion or materials had been filed by the Applicants to satisfy or explain the delay. 
 
 
 
 [55] 
  It is the Court's conclusion that the Chief and Band Council retain customary and inherent powers when legislation has not "covered the field" of legislative activity with respect to the Band. In this case, the  
 PLEA 
   
 does not mention suspensions for misconduct,  
 but there must be a mechanism of necessity to enforce Band Council legislation 
 .  
 The Band Council has previously suspended a councillor for misconduct and deference must be afforded to this, although new, yet, acknowledged custom. 
  The Applicants have not demonstrated through evidence that the Band Council had acted in an unreasonable manner in their decisions. 
 
 
 
 [56] 
  Although it is noted that the factual record is a veritable labyrinth, nevertheless, the evidence demonstrates misconduct by the Applicants. The Applicants in their own affidavits explicitly admit to the use of profanity and raised voices at Band Council meetings and to walking out in the middle of Band Council meetings. The Applicants' misconduct is confirmed by their own sworn admissions. 
 
 
 
 [57] 
  Firstly, the Court finds that the resolutions were intra vires, the Band Council; and, secondly, no evidence has been brought before the Court that would demonstrate the Council's decisions were unreasonable. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [58] 
   
 THIS COURT ORDERS that 
  the Application for judicial review be dismissed without costs due to the nature of the factual record as presented by both parties. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: E. Joanne Oley/ve 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




