[51]
In oral argument counsel for the Minister agreed that the rationale for the Minister's decision is contained in that portion of the memorandum found under the heading "Recommendation". In full, that portion of the memorandum is as follows:
"We do not recommend that Ministerial relief be granted to Mr. Naeem as per section 34(2) of
IRPA
to overcome his inadmissibility pursuant to section 34(1)(f) of
IRPA
. Section 34(2) states: '
The matters referred to in subsection (1) do not constitute inadmissibility in respect of a permanent resident or a foreign national who satisfies the Minister that their presence in Canada would not be detrimental to the national interest
.'
"Mr. Naeem was a member of the MQM for eleven years. He was nominated to a leadership level in the student wing of the MQM while attending National College. He met a number of times each year with other executive leaders to plan actions that would further the cause of the Mohajir students.
"It was under his leadership that a group of students clashed with police and he was arrested and beaten. He was warned to desist from further activities with the MQM. He disregarded the warning and was arrested a few months later at a MQM office. He was detained for one week and released. One month later, a more serious altercation with the police took place while travelling with party members to Hyderabad. Police opened fire and a number of party members were killed.
"Mr. Naeem described himself as a prominent member of the MQM and, as such, a target for police arrest. This forced him to go into hiding for a few years. Despite the threat of arrest, Mr. Naeem remained a loyal party member and continued to attend secret meetings. This led to another arrest and a week of detention during which time he was again beaten. He moved to another city but continued to remain active in the MQM and narrowly escaped an additional arrest by police. In his submissions, Mr. Naeem claimed that he was not very actively involved in the party after 1993; however, he was active enough in 1998 to attend to [sic] secret party meetings in Lahore (Appendix 3).
"His prominence as a party member led to a final attack on him by members of a rival faction of the MQM, as well as threats to his family. His parents persuaded him that it would be best for everyone if he left the country.
"The numerous altercations with the authorities suggest that Mr. Naeem was more than just a minor member of the MQM. He was obliged to go underground for several years and to move to another city to escape being targeted by police. During the eleven years of his membership, the MQM perpetrated numerous acts of violence and human rights abuse (Appendix 2). Despite living with the continual threat of imprisonment and beatings, Mr. Naeem remained loyal to the party. As a prominent member he would have had considerable knowledge of the violence. Despite his denial that he didn't support the use of violence, his continued membership within the party strongly suggests that he did condone it.
"In his descriptions of the violence that was directed towards him by police authorities, as well as a rival MQM faction, Mr. Naeem illustrated his continued dedication to the group and his strong belief in party policies and activities. In spite of the continual threat of arrest or physical harm he remained loyal to the MQM. Violent acts were committed between rival MQM factions, against government authorities as well as the general public. His longevity within the party ranks denotes his acceptance of violent acts to attain political goals. No mention was made by Mr. Naeem of any acts of violence perpetrated by the MQM.
"The rationale for our recommendation is detailed in the considerations above.
"If you agree with our recommendation, Mr. Naeem's application for permanent residence will be refused. He cannot be removed from Canada at this time pursuant to section 115 of
IRPA
, as he has been recognized as a Convention refugee and as he does not present a threat to the security of Canada.
"If you do not agree and the reasons for your decision are not included in the text above, please provide the rationale for your decision."