[21]
In this respect, I am satisfied that the evidence adduced by the respondent by way of affidavit shows use of the trademark as registered. The affidavit of Mrs. Ziosi clearly establishes that the labels were used in association with wares referred to in the registration. In
Plough (Canada) Ltd. v. Aerosol Fillers Inc.
(1980), 34 N.R. 39; 53 C.P.R.(2d) 62 (F.C.), affd. 45 C.P.R.(2d) 194 (T.D.), the Federal Court of Appeal held, at pages 63-64, that s. 44(1), which was replaced by s. 45(1), requires that evidence adduced by way of affidavit or statutory declaration not merely state but show use of the mark by describing the use of the mark within the meaning of the definition of use in the
Trademarks Act
. The statements put forth in Mrs. Ziosi's affidavit were sufficient to satisfy the Registrar that the use of the trademark was shown in association with wares in Canada.
"10. As a nonexhaustive illustration of the use of the trademark 'Vitaliano Pancaldi' (& design) TMA 379,823 by its registered owner Le Cravatte DiPancaldi S.r.1., in the normal course of trade, I file herewith as exhibit 'A', in bulk, some invoices dated between October 29, 1993 and March 30, 1995, showing sales of ties for women and for men, as well as pocket scarves to PANCALDI's Canadian distributor, for clients whose names are also indicated on the invoices, where available. The amounts shown in the 'unit price' column are in Italian lira; 100 lira is approximately equivalent to 0.09c Canadian dollar; (one lira = .0000918c).
"11. All the items mentioned in the invoices consisting of exhibit 'A' bear the trademark 'Vitaliano Pancaldi' (& design); as a nonexhaustive illustration of the use by PANCALDI of its trademark 'Vitaliano Pancaldi' (& design) on such items and the manner in which the trademark is associated with the clothing items and accessories, I file herewith, as exhibit 'B', in bulk, some samples of labels such as those fixed to the wares PANCALDI has sold in Canada: one sample is a fabric label sown in the clothing items (such as would be sown at the back of a tie or on the edge of a scarf); another sample is a cardboard label that may be attached to the item."