 [13] 
  Sections 27 and 28 of the  
 Act 
  address the issue of third party intervention under the  
 Act 
 : 
 
 
 
 "27(1) Where the head of a government institution intends to disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains or that the head of the institution has reason to believe might contain 
 
 
 
 (a) trade secrets of a third party, 
 
 
 
 (b) information described in paragraph 20(1)(b) that was supplied by a third party, or 
 
 
 
 (c) information the disclosure of which the head of the institution could reasonably foresee might effect a result described in paragraph 20(1)(c) or (d) in respect of a third party, 
 
 
 
 the head of the institution shall, subject to subsection (2), if the third party can reasonably be located, within thirty days after the request is received, give written notice to the third party of the request and of the fact that the head of the institution intends to disclose the record or part thereof. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "28(1) Where a notice is given by the head of a government institution under subsection 27(1) to a third party in respect of a record or a part thereof, 
 
 
 
 (a) the third party shall, within twenty days after the notice is given, be given the opportunity to make representations to the head of the institution as to why the record or the part thereof should not be disclosed; and 
 
 
 
 (b) the head of the institution shall, within thirty days after the notice is given, if the third party has been given an opportunity to make representations under paragraph (a), make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the record or the part thereof and give written notice of the decision to the third party. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(4) Where, pursuant to paragraph (1)(b), the head of a government institution decides to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof, the head of the institution shall give the person who made the request access to the record or the part thereof forthwith on completion of twenty days after a notice is given under that paragraph, unless a review of the decision is requested under section 44." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 