[16]
From this statement, the respondent argues that the applicant
must
proceed by way of action for two reasons: the applicant is not seeking declaratory relief and the SIO does not have power under s. 52(1) of the
Constitution Act
, 1982 to declare inoperative sections of the
Immigration Act
. In further support, the respondent relies on the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in
Tétreault-Gadoury v. Canada Employment and Immigration Commission
, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 22; 126 N.R. 1; 81 D.L.R.(4th) 358, in which Mr. Justice La Forest wrote at p. 37:
"The appellant raises a subsidiary issue as to whether the Federal Court of Appeal was entitled to consider the constitutional question, if the Board of Referees did not have jurisdiction over it. As I indicated at the outset of this judgment, the present case came to the Federal Court of Appeal by virtue of s. 28(1) of the
Federal Court Act
, without the benefit of a ruling by the umpire. Section 28(1)(a) allows for the possibility of a direct application being made to the Court of Appeal to set aside the decision of a federal board on the ground that the board refused to exercise its jurisdiction.
"Had the respondent first appealed the decision of the Board of Referees to an umpire, and then to the Federal Court of Appeal, the umpire would have had jurisdiction to determine the constitutional issue. The respondent, however, chose to bypass the umpire and get a ruling from the Federal Court of Appeal directly.
"At the time the respondent raised her constitutional challenge before the Board of Referees, the jurisdiction of the Board to entertain such a challenge presented an unsettled legal question. The temptation to raise this unresolved jurisdictional question before the Court of Appeal directly was understandable. However, one cannot overlook the special nature of the Federal Court of Appeal's powers of review under s. 28 of the
Federal Court Act
. The powers of the Federal Court of Appeal under that section are limited to overseeing and controlling the legality of decisions of administrative bodies and to referring matters back to those bodies for redetermination, with directions when appropriate: see
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, s. 52(d);
Poirier v. Canada (Minister of Veterans Affairs)
, [1989] 3 F.C. 233, per Marceau, J., at p. 247. I am therefore of the view that, while the jurisdictional question was legitimately before the Court of Appeal, the court had no jurisdiction to make a final determination of the constitutional question."