 [14] 
  Finally, I would observe that the law is quite clear that parties cannot contract out of the  
 Canadian Human Rights Act 
 . In  
 Human Rights Commission (Ont.) v. London Monenco Consultants Ltd. et al. 
  (1992), 57 O.A.C. 222; 18 C.H.R.R. D/118 (C.A.), Robins, J.A., in respect of the  
 Ontario Human Rights Code 
 , 1981, S.O. 1981, c. 53, noted at p. 122: 
 
 
 
 "On this reasoning, the Board, in essence, approved the notion that private parties are competent to contract themselves out of the  
 Code 
 , and proceeded on that basis. In my respectful opinion, this was an erroneous approach to the issue. It is well-settled that private parties are not free to contract out of this public policy enactment. The facts stressed by the Board in this respect were immaterial to the issue. A private contract agreeing to a discriminatory policy or practice cannot serve as a ground for holding that the discriminatory policy or practice is not in violation of the  
 Code 
 . As McIntyre, J., stated in  
 Etobicoke 
 , supra, at pp. 213-214 [D/785 para. 6905]: 
 
 
 
 'Although the  
 Code 
  contains no explicit restrictions on such contracting out, it is nevertheless a public statute and it constitutes public policy in Ontario as appears from a reading of the Statute itself and as declared in the preamble. It is clear from the authorities, both in Canada and in England, that parties are not competent to contract themselves out of the provisions of such enactments and that contracts having such effect are void, as contrary to public policy.'" 
 
 
 
 I cannot rule out that after an agreement between parties, returning to the Commission with a new complaint might in some circumstances constitute bad faith such that the Commission should refuse to deal with it. Indeed, the 1985 agreement provided that the job evaluation plan was to be submitted to the Commission to ensure that it met the requirements of the  
 Canadian Human Rights Act 
  and in that respect a fresh complaint might be considered redundant and perhaps filed in bad faith. However, in view of the prohibition against contracting out of the  
 Act 
 , the Commission would have to proceed with the utmost caution before dismissing a complaint on this ground at an early stage.