[1]
Muldoon, J.
: Fairness is the bedrock foundation of Canada's justice system - fair procedures and fair adjudication. Because the actual justice system (as distinct from the notion of justice) is a human creation it is never perfect, but judges and legislators heroically keep striving to make it perfect - and a good thing that is, too - knowing that they can never perfectly succeed.
[2]
Fairness is naturally much akin to the notion of the "republic of ideas", in which it matters not
whose
idea is fostered, for all ideas are born equal, those of the Chief Justice or the panhandler, the politically "correct" or the politically "incorrect". The ideas will shrivel or prosper only in the light of examination and the keen debate made possible by freedom of speech. So it is with fairness. It matters not
whose
rights are asserted, those of a Crown minister, or a convicted criminal. The rights asserted will be determined according to law, without fear or favour, ultimately by a superior court.
[3]
The applicant is a convicted criminal. He presented a statement of claim to this court, in which he complained of unlawful imprisonment in a segregation unit at Donnacona Institution "for a full 78 days in spite of a complaint and grievance process initiated by [him] upon being locked up, and was released only upon reception ... of the decision at the second level of grievance (Québec Regional)" who noted that after the (plaintiff's) applicant's grievance the Donnacona authorities had reviewed their practices, and consequently, the applicant was to be "reimbursed for the loss of pay during the period". His grievance was upheld. In paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) of his statement of claim he pithily demonstrated the absence of lawful cause for his being locked up in a prison within a prison. He sues for damages for unlawful imprisonment. (See:
LeBar v. R.
, [1989] 1 F.C. 603; 90 N.R. 5 (F.C.A.)
[4]
The applicant's statement of claim was filed on June 16, 1994, and the court's registry officer in Ottawa transmitted copies of it to the office of the Deputy Attorney General of Canada on June 24, 1994. Apparently no word, no request for extra time to defend, ever came from the law officers of the Crown.
[5]
This court's rule 402(2)(a)(i) requires that a defence be filed within 30 days after service of the statement of claim, if the defendant is served within Canada, and if after the 30-day period, the defence, according to rule 402(2)(b)(i), must be filed, if at all,
before
an application has been made for default judgment.
[6]
The (plaintiff) applicant filed his motion for default judgment on February 6, 1995, and served the defendant with a copy of it on February 21, 1995. Awakening from their slumbers, the law officers of the Crown filed a defence, at last, on February 24, 1995. If rule 402(2)(b)(i) were conclusive, this court would pronounce default judgment against the Crown pursuant to rule 433 "sur le champ". However, the Crown has been given a special privilege by Parliament, found in the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50 in s. 25, thus:
[See printed version]
Then, s. 27 runs thus:
[See printed version]
[7]
Rule 319(1) ordains that any application to the court shall be made by motion and initiated by notice of motion, which is just what the applicant has done. Alas, from his point of view, he was unaware of s. 25 of the above mentioned suing-the-government statute. However the defendant was made aware of his application to obtain default judgment on the day of his notice, one might say his "préavis" was served on February 21, 1995 at 3:35 p.m. according to the acknowledgement of service stamp signed for Deputy Attorney General. The applicant has given more than 14 days' notice, for the date upon which the court will hear that leave application has not yet been fixed, as it must yet be. The court will give leave, if sought, for the applicant to file and serve a copy of a rule 324 letter requesting that his application - motion - for leave be disposed of without personal appearance, and to file and serve a further affidavit in support along with representations in writing on his behalf, to paraphrase rule 324. Then a duty judge will ultimately adjudicate the applicant's motion - his application - for leave to enter default judgment against the Crown.
[8]
Only one other matter needs to be dealt with here, lest the Crown be seen to be taking unfair advantage over the applicant. The Crown should withdraw - deregister - its defence. If it does not do so by close of business in this court's Ottawa registry on Tuesday, March 14, 1995, it will automatically be struck from the register. This will be an order nisi: unless it be withdrawn, it will be struck.
[9]
The Crown's law officers will appreciate the meaning of s. 27 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, recited above. That statutory provision leads right back into rule 402(2)(b)(i), which forbids the filing of a defence after an application has been made for default judgment pursuant to rules 432 et seq. The application has been made precisely when the Deputy Attorney General has received his "préavis" under s. 25 of the
Act
, unless one interprets that section as a device to permit him or her to scuttle across the wire in an undignified race to very, very tardy filing. This court does not so interpret s. 25, which provides for a dignified hearing or other adjudication on the matter of leave to enter default judgment. The Crown's defence is a touch premature at this stage. Needless to elaborate the Crown has all the rights of response to the applicant's application for leave which are accorded by rule 324.
[10]
Why rule 324? First of all, the applicant has chosen that means because he is a prisoner. This is the virtually ideal access to the court for prisoners as was said by this judge in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
The applicant here does not seem to suffer from any lack of literacy, be it noted.
[11]
This court will of course entertain any proper approach whether from behind bars or carpeted offices inter alia. Rule 324 provides access for prisoners. That is what fairness means. The court will entertain this case, step by careful step, in the expectation that whatever the outcome it will represent law and justice, without fear or favour.
Order
[12]
1. The applicant may proceed under rule 324 with his motion for leave to enter default judgment as described in rule 433, and he has leave to file and serve a rule 324 letter, and a supporting affidavit, and his representations on his own behalf: his notice of motion for default judgment filed on February 6, 1995 is considered to initiate his application for leave pursuant to s. 25 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
;
[13]
2. The applicant Caron, unless prison exigencies prevent him, is to file his documents, if any, in court as provided in paragraph 1 above, not later than close of business in this court's most convenient registry on Wednesday, March 29, 1995;
[14]
3. The Crown is hereby on notice to exercise such rights under rule 324 and under said s. 25 of the
Act
as it may be advised to pursue;
[15]
4. The Crown's defence purportedly filed on February 24, 1995, unless earlier withdrawn, be and it is struck out at close of business on Tuesday, March 14, 1995.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/sms
[End of document]
