[1]
Rothstein, J.
: This is an application made pursuant to section 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
for:
1. Certiorari quashing the decision as signed by Immigration Counsellor I. Pawlosky, Canada Immigration Centre, Winnipeg, in a letter dated January 2nd, 1992 not to continue processing the appli­cation for landing of the applicant, Sonny Dass.
2. Mandamus ordering the respondent, the Minister of Employment and Immigration, to issue the necessary documents showing that the applicant has permanent residence in Canada.
Chronology Of Events
[2]
The following is a chronology of events:
December 6, 1988
Mr. Dass, a national of Trinidad, arrived in Canada as a visitor.
March 31, 1989
Mr. Dass married Violet Rosaline Wiesner in Winnipeg.
April 9, 1989
Mr. Dass requested an exemption on compassionate and humanitarian grounds from the provisions of section 9(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The exemption would entitle him to apply for permanent residence while within Canada. The normal procedure is that such application must be made before a person enters Canada.
May 18, 1989
Sandra Luhowy of the Canada Immigra­tion Centre in Winnipeg wrote Mr. Dass advising him that the Winnipeg Immi­gration Office had formed the opinion that there were humanitarian and com­passionate grounds to request that the Governor-in-Council allow him to become a permanent resident while he remained in Canada.
May 25, 1989
Ms. Luhowy submitted a report to the Governor-in-Council indicating that Mr. Dass was requesting that he "be processed under espousal program". The request form also included the following notation: "Appears to meet requirements. Landing is recommended".
July 20, 1989
Ms. Luhowy telexed Trinidad and Tobago as follows:
"Subject has been accepted for perma­nent residence in Canada under espousal program. Would appreciate if you would medically examine 2 single children in Trinidad and provide results ..."
November 11, 1989
Apparently as a result of a domestic dispute on this date, Mr. Dass is charged with:
a)
Count 1
- assault with a weapon under subs. 267(1) of the
Crimi­nal Code
.
b)
Count 2
- possession of a weapon dangerous to the public peace under s. 87 of the
Criminal Code
.
c)
Counts 3 & 4
- two counts of utter­ing threats to kill under paragraph 264.1(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code
.
March 6, 1990
The criminal charges came to the atten­tion of Ms. Luhowy. In the information that came to her attention there is a suggestion (apparently incorrect) that the charges under the first two counts were stayed. Upon checking as to whether the marriage was intact, Violet Dass said that the couple were together and she wished to continue sponsoring Mr. Dass.
April 26, 1990
Order-in-Council P.C. 1990-748 is issued exempting Mr. Dass (and others) from the application of s. 9(1) of the
Immigration Act
.
March 20, 1991
Mr. Dass is convicted on all four counts under the
Criminal Code
.
September 10, 1991
A report pursuant to s. 27 of the
Immi­gration Act
is prepared by I.K. Pawlosky, an Immigration Counsellor and sent to the Deputy Minister of Employment and Immigration.
September 24, 1991
Immigration Counsellor Pawlosky writes to Director, Immigration Manitoba Region, requesting permission to issue a Minister's Permit to Mr. Dass to allow him to remain in Canada until he is able to apply for rehabilitation.
December 17, 1991
Director, Case Research and Case Pro­cessing, Department of Employment and Immigration, writes to Director, Immi­gration Manitoba Region, disagreeing that a Minister's Permit should be issued.
December 30, 1991
Deputy Minister of Employment and Immigration directs that an inquiry be held pursuant to s. 27(3) of the
Immi­gration Act
.
January 2, 1992
Immigration Counsellor Pawlosky writes Mr. Dass advising that a Minister's Per­mit has not been approved, that "we are unable to continue processing your ap­plication", that a direction for an inquiry has been signed and that Mr. Dass would be informed of the date and time he must appear for the inquiry.
Analysis
[3]
Counsel for the applicant argues that the plaintiff is entitled to a landing document. He says that Order-in-Council P.C. 1990-748 was issued by the Governor-in-Council after the Minister was aware of the criminal charges against Mr. Dass and therefore a landing document should be issued. He argues that the Minister may not undertake proceedings to revoke Mr. Dass' landing on the grounds of his subsequent conviction on these charges because the Order-in-Council was issued in full knowledge of the charges. Alternatively, counsel for the applicant argues that even if the Minister is intent on removing Mr. Dass from Canada, Mr. Dass is entitled to the procedure afforded perma­nent residents.
[4]
Counsel for the respondent argues that the issuance of the Order-in-Council does not confer landing status or permanent resi­dent status on Mr. Dass. The basis for this position is that the official in the Department of Employment and Immigration who made the request to the Governor-in-Council only wrote on the request form: "
Appears
to meet requirements" [emphasis mine] and that it remained open to the Department, notwith­standing the issuance of the Order-in-Council, to refuse to continue processing Mr. Dass' permanent residence application.
[5]
Counsel for the applicant relies on
Sivacilar v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1984), 57 N.R. 57 (F.C.A.). At p. 59 Hugessen, J.A., states:
"The document submitted to the Governor-in-Council requesting special authority contains, as I have indicated, in two separ­ate places a formal assertion, endorsed by a senior immigration officer, that all the requirements of the
Act
have been met. The document is a request for authority to admit the applicant notwith­standing s. 9(1). Upon the adoption of the order-in-council P.C. 1983-2649, the applicant became a person with the right to come into or remain in Canada. He had acquired the right to be landed and nothing remained to be done in the grant­ing of landing to him. His wife's subse­quent purported withdrawal of the spon­sorship was accordingly without effect.
"For this reason, therefore, I will allow the application and set aside the departure notice issued to the applicant."
[6]
In
Dawson v. Canada
(1988), 21 F.T.R. 212; 6 I.L.R.(2d) 37, Teitelbaum, J., after referring to the above passage from
Sivacilar
, and after confirming that in that case the immigration officials had repre­sented that "all other requirements had been met" states at p. 54:
"I therefore find that the applicant, Alphonsus Liguori Dawson, had acquired the right to be granted permanent residency in Canada as a landed immigrant when the Governor-in-Council's decree was published. I find that the wife's pur­ported withdrawal of sponsorship is of no effect. I order the respondent, the Minister of Employment and Immigration, to process the application filed by the applicant and to grant to him permanent residency in Canada.
"The respondent is hereby prohibited from ordering the applicant's removal from Canada which was ordered for August 21, 1988."
[7]
These cases seem to stand for the prop­osition that once officials in the Department of Employment and Immigration indicate that an applicant has met the requirements of the
Immigration Act
and an Order-in-Council is issued, such as Order-in-Council P.C. 1990-748 in this case, a person acquires a right to be landed and a right to permanent residency status irrespective of subsequent events e.g., withdrawal of spon­sorship by a wife even though such sponsor­ship was a condition of the application leading to the Order-in-Council.
[8]
Counsel for the respondent relies upon two decisions of this court. In
John v. Min­ister of Employment and Immigration
, court file T-2463-89, Addy, J., states:
"The request for special authority to be exempted from the requirement of a visa and for permission to remain in Canada from the 23rd of July 1987 until the 22nd of July 1988 and which was granted by the Governor General-in-Council, did not, as in many other similar cases, contain a statement from the Immigration Authorities that these requirements of the
Act
and of the
Regulations
had been complied with. On the contrary the statement was to the effect that it appeared that the applicant might meet those requirements.
"On applying for permanent residence on the 20th of April 1987 the applicant made a false declaration by stating that he had never been convicted of a criminal offence and, more importantly, that he had never been ordered to leave Canada, when in fact, in addition to having been convicted of possession of marihuana, he had previ­ously been arrested and forcibly deported to Trinidad in October, 1980 pursuant to a deportation order which had been issued against him. No consent to return to Canada had ever been given pursuant to s. 55(1) (formerly 57(1)).
"It would be improper for the court to prevent the Immigration authorities from carrying out their statutory authority to hold an inquiry.
"The motion is dismissed with costs."
[9]
In
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[10]
John
and
Ferrerya
, supra, seem to stand for the proposition that, where the Department of Employment and Immigra­tion, when submitting a recommendation and request for an Order-in-Council, has not made a conclusive determination that an applicant has met the requirements of the
Immigration Act
for landing or permanent residency and later determines that the rec­ommendation was based upon misrepresen­tations by the applicant, or that facts relied upon by the Department were not accurate, the issuance of an Order-in-Council does not confer the right to be landed or to be a permanent resident.
[11]
In the case at bar the Department's recommendation for an Order-in-Council exempting Mr. Dass from the requirements of s. 9(1) states: "Appears to meet require­ments. Landing is recommended." The Order-in-Council was subsequently issued, presumably based on the request and recom­mendation of the Department which included these comments.
[12]
I have no difficulty accepting that the words "Appear to meet requirements" leaves it open to the Department to verify the accuracy of information provided by an applicant, or to determine the bona fides of a marriage before confirming conclusively that all requirements had been met. In
John
, supra, it was found that an applicant had misrepresented information about his former criminal convictions and deportation. In
Ferrerya
, supra, upon investigation, it was found that a marriage was not bona fide. These are matters of inaccuracies of past facts or assumptions about a state of cir­cumstances that existed at the time when, and upon which, the Department made its request and recommendation for an Order-in-Council.
[13]
However, I do not think that the words "Appears to meet requirements. Landing is recommended" mean that the Department is leaving open the question of an applicant meeting the requirements of the
Act
in order to take account of subsequent events.
[14]
In the case at bar, there is no evidence that the information upon which the recommendation for the Order-in-Council was based was inaccurate.
"In the March 6, 1990 internal memo of the Department, there is an indication that the more serious charges against Mr. Dass had been stayed when, in fact, Mr. Dass was ultimately convicted of all four charges, including the more serious ones. However, nothing in the material before me indicates how this misinformation was given to the Department or that the Department, had correct information been given to it, would have taken steps to hold up the issuance of the Order-in-Council."
[15]
I come to this conclusion on the basis of the specific wording of the request for the Order-in-Council in this case. It may be that in other circumstances the Department, in its request for Order-in-Council, could leave open for subsequent determination whether or not an applicant meets the re­quirements of the
Immigration Act
. Whether or not an Order-in-Council based on an inconclusive recommendation of that form would be granted, would be for the Governor-in-Council to decide.
[16]
In the result, I find that the Department did determine that Mr. Dass had met the requirements of the
Act
, and that landing was recommended. Upon the issuance of Order-in-Council P.C. 1990-748 he became a person with a right to remain in Canada. He had acquired a right to be landed and nothing remained to be done in the granting of landing to him.
[17]
For this reason I am of the opinion that refusal of the Department to continue to process Mr. Dass' application for landing and permanent residence was not consistent with the effect of the Department's prior determi­nation that the applicant appeared to meet requirements and with the issuance of the Order-in-Council.
[18]
I am not unmindful of the fact that Mr. Dass has been convicted of a serious offence under the
Criminal Code
and that the offence relates to domestic violence. As I understand the evidence, one of the offenses of which Mr. Dass was convicted was s. 267(1) of the
Criminal Code
. It states:
"267(1) Every one who, in committing an assault,
(a) carries, uses or threatens to use a weapon or an imitation thereof, or
(b) causes bodily harm to the complain­ant,
is guilty of an indicatable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years."
[19]
The finding in this case is concerned with due process. It relates to the documen­tation and procedures pertaining to applica­tions for landing and permanent residence. In deciding this case, I am not to be taken as condoning or turning a blind eye to Mr. Dass' convictions. The order in this case will not entitle Mr. Dass to remain in this coun­try indefinitely as if the criminal con­victions never took place. In the case of a permanent resident having been convicted of a serious criminal offence, such as one under subs. 267(1) of the
Criminal Code
, it is open to the Department to commence proceedings under s. 27(1)(d) of the
Immigration Act
which could lead to Mr. Dass having to leave Canada at some future time.
[20]
The application for certiorari is granted quashing the decision of the respondent not to process Mr. Dass' application for perma­nent residency and an order of mandamus will issue requiring the respondent to process the application of Mr. Dass for landing and permanent residency while he remains in Canada. Costs to the applicant.
[21]
At the conclusion of argument in this case, counsel brought to my attention s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
which came into force February 1, 1993. It states:
"83(1) A judgment of the Federal Court--Trial Division on an application for judi­cial review with respect to any decision or order made, or any matter arising, under this Act or the rules or regulations there­under may be appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal only if the Federal Court--Trial Division has at the time of render­ing judgment certified that a serious ques­tion of general importance is involved and has stated that question."
[22]
Both counsel suggested that this deci­sion could raise a serious question of general importance. Since this case was heard on January 27, 1993, and judgment was reserved, counsel were concerned that s. 83(1) could become operative as of February 1, 1993, and that in order to appeal, the Trial Division judge making the decision would have to certify and state the question for consideration by the Federal Court of Appeal. However, on February 1, 1993, the Chief Justice of this Court issued the fol­lowing Direction with respect to this and five other cases:
"Direction No. 20
"Pursuant To s. 118 of An
Act
to amend the
Immigration Act
and other Acts in consequence thereof, S.C. 1992, c. 49 ('the
Act
') and because I consider that it is in the interest of the administration of justice to do so,
"I Hereby Direct:
1. that s. 117 of the
Act
shall not apply to those applications for judicial review listed in the schedule annexed hereto and forming part of this direction, all of which have been commenced at the Trial Division pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, as that section read immediately before the coming into force of s. 73 of the
Act
, and had been set down for hearing before that date;
2. that each of those applications shall be heard and disposed of by the Trial Divi­sion as an application for judicial review under s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, as though s. 73 of the Act had not been enacted; and
3. that the
Federal Court Rules
and the practice and procedures of the Trial Division shall apply to those applications for judicial review."
[23]
Section 73 of c. 49 enacted s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
. By Direction No. 20, with respect to this case, s. 83(1) is to be treated as if it had not been enacted.
[24]
Since s. 83(1) does not apply in this case, it will be open to counsel to take such further action as either of them may consider advisable.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sg
[End of document]
