[21]
THIS COURT
:
1.
THIS COURT DECLARES AND ADJUDGES
that
as between the Plaintiff and the Defendant, Edward Sivitilli, (the Defendant), the Canadian Trade-mark TMA 734 460, the Registered Moroccanoil Trade-mark (and the related Moroccanoil Canadian Trade-mark Applications and/or the Moroccanoil Get-up) (referred to as the Trade-mark) has been infringed by the Defendant by virtue of the sale of hair care products bearing the Trade-mark without the consent, license or permission of the Plaintiff contrary to section 19 of the
Trade-marks Act
, [the Act] RSC 1985, c T-13, as amended.
2.
THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that
the Defendant has directed public attention to the Defendant's hair care products in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada between the products and the Plaintiff's authorised product contrary to the provisions of paragraph 7(b) of the Act.
3.
THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that
the Defendant has passed off the hair care products as those of the Plaintiff, contrary to paragraph 7(c) of the Act.
4.
THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that
the Defendant has used the Trade- mark in a false and material way which misled the public as to the character, quality or compositions of the Defendant's hair care products and as to the mode of the manufacture, production or performance thereof contrary to the provisions of paragraph 7(d) of the Act.
5.
THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that
the Defendant has depreciated the value of the goodwill attaching to the Trade-mark contrary to the provisions of subsection 22(1) of the Act.
6.
THIS COURT ORDERS that
the Defendant is restrained from offering for sale, displaying, advertising, selling, manufacturing, importing, exporting, distributing or otherwise dealing in hair care products not being those of the Plaintiff, bearing the Trade-mark or bearing any trade-mark or trade name confusing therewith.
7.
THIS COURT ORDERS that
the Defendant is restrained from reproducing, copying, or in any way using the Trade-mark or any other trade-marks or trade names confusing therewith in association with the hair care products which are not manufactured by or for the Plaintiff or in the advertising, promotion or displaying of same in association with such trade-mark.
8.
THIS COURT ORDERS that
the Defendant is restrained from directing public attention to the Defendant's hair care products in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada between its hair care products and the products of the Plaintiff contrary to the provisions of paragraph 7(b) of the Act by the use of the Trade-mark or any trade-mark or trade name confusingly similar thereto.
9.
THIS COURT ORDERS that
the Defendant shall pay to the Plaintiff the sum of $41,000 on account of damages, plus pre-judgment and post-judgment interest at the rate of 3% per year.
10.
THIS COURT RESERVES THE RIGHT to
make an Order as to costs of this motion and the action to date after receiving submissions from the parties. The Plaintiff is to serve and file its submissions within 7 days hereof, the Defendant shall then have 7 days to serve and file his submissions and the Plaintiff shall have 3 days to file any reply. Submissions are limited to a maximum of 5 pages and reply to 2 pages.