 [9] 
   
 Zalzali 
 , a decision rendered prior to  
 Ward 
 , concerns a national of Lebanon who claimed refugee protection based on a well-founded fear from militias in Lebanon due to his political opinions. An important feature of the claim is the fact that, at the time, the national government exercised control over no part of the country. In the decision, writing on behalf of Justices Hugessen and MacGuigan, Justice Décary states that the principal question for determination is whether there can be persecution where there is no form of guilt, complicity or participation by the state in question, and answers in the affirmative. In addition, Justice Décary makes the following observations: a state's inability to protect is governed by objective criteria which can be verified independently of the fear experienced (para.16); and insofar as it is established that meaningful national protection is available to a claimant, a fear of persecution cannot be said to exist (quoting Professor Hathaway with approval, para. 17). The following findings were are also made: 
 
 
 
 "There are probably several reasons beyond a person's control why he might be unable to claim the protection of a State, one of them being, and this is obvious, the non-existence of a government to which that person may resort. There are situations, and the case at bar is one of them, in which the political and military circumstances in a country at a given time are such that it is simply impossible to speak of a government with control of the territory and able to provide  
 effective protection 
 . Just as a state of civil war is no obstacle to an application for refugee status, [See  
 Salibian v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
 , [1990] 3 F.C. 250 (C.A.)] so the non-existence of a government equally can be no obstacle (para.20); 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "In the case at bar the Refugee Division blamed the appellant for not trying to obtain protection from the Lebanese army. The evidence is that no established authority was able to provide the appellant with the desired protection. In the circumstances, therefore, the appellant was unable to avail himself of the protection of his country, and far from disqualifying him, this, on the contrary enabled him to meet one of the conditions imposed in the definition of a refugee (para.23)." (Emphasis added) 
 
 
 