 [10] 
  Some six months before the decision in  
 Ward 
  was rendered, the decision in  
 Villafranca 
  was delivered.  
 Villafranca 
  concerns a policeman from the Philippines who, because he had been marked for death by a communist terrorist group, fled his country in fear for his life. On review of the Refugee Division's decision granting refugee protection, the decision was set aside for the reason that, in reaching its decision, the Refugee Division failed to address the issue of state protection. Writing on behalf of Justices Marceau and Décary, Justice Hugessen made a number of observations; those that require comment are numbered in square brackets for easy reference: 
 
 
 
 "The burden of showing that one is not able to avail oneself of the protection of one's own state is not easily satisfied. The test is an objective one and involves the claimant showing either that he is physically prevented from seeking his government's aid (clearly not the case here) or that the government itself is in some way prevented from giving it. 
 
 
 
 " 
 [1] No government that makes any claim to democratic values or protection of human rights can guarantee the protection of all of its citizens at all times. 
 
 
 
 " 
 [2] Thus, it is not enough for a claimant merely to show that his government has not always been effective at protecting persons in his particular situation. 
 
 
 
 "Terrorism in the name of one warped ideology or another is a scourge afflicting many societies today; its victims, however much they may merit our sympathy, do not become convention refugees simply because their governments have been unable to suppress the evil. Where, however, the state is so weak, and its control over all or part of its territory so tenuous as to make it a government in name only, as this Court found in the case of  
 Zalzali v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
  [[1991] 3 F.C. 605], a refugee may justly claim to be unable to avail himself of its protection. 
 
 
 
 " 
 [3] Situations of civil war, invasion or the total collapse of internal order will normally be required to support a claim of inability. 
 
 
 
 " 
 [4] On the other hand, where a state is in effective control of its territory, has military, police and civil authority in place and makes serious efforts to protect its citizens from terrorist activities, the mere fact that it is not always successful at doing so will not be enough to justify a claim that the victims of terrorism are unable to avail themselves of such protection. 
 " (Emphasis added)