 [27] 
  Justice Wilson in  
 Lavallee 
  enforces the concept that understanding the context in which an action or inaction takes place is essential to judging the action or inaction itself. While  
 Lavallee 
  dealt with judging the actions of a woman who killed her abusive husband, the following statements, at paras. 31 to 34 and 38, are instructive with respect to the approach to be adopted when dealing with a gender-based claim for protection, and, indeed, other factual scenarios calling for enhanced knowledge and understanding on the part of decision-makers: 
 
 
 
 "Expert evidence on the psychological effect of battering on wives and common law partners must, it seems to me, be both relevant and necessary in the context of the present case. How can the mental state of the appellant be appreciated without it? The average member of the public (or of the jury) can be forgiven for asking: Why would a woman put up with this kind of treatment? Why should she continue to live with such a man? How could she love a partner who beat her to the point of requiring hospitalization? We would expect the woman to pack her bags and go. Where is her self-respect? Why does she not cut loose and make a new life for herself? Such is the reaction of the average person confronted with the so-called 'battered wife syndrome'. We need help to understand it and help is available from trained professionals. 
 
 
 
 "The gravity, indeed, the tragedy of domestic violence can hardly be overstated. Greater media attention to this phenomenon in recent years has revealed both its prevalence and its horrific impact on women from all walks of life. Far from protecting women from it the law historically sanctioned the abuse of women within marriage as an aspect of the husband's ownership of his wife and his 'right' to chastise her. One need only recall the centuries old law that a man is entitled to beat his wife with a stick 'no thicker than his thumb'. 
 
 
 
 "Laws do not spring out of a social vacuum. The notion that a man has a right to 'discipline' his wife is deeply rooted in the history of our society. The woman's duty was to serve her husband and to stay in the marriage at all costs 'till death do us part' and to accept as her due any 'punishment' that was meted out for failing to please her husband. One consequence of this attitude was that 'wife battering' was rarely spoken of, rarely reported, rarely prosecuted, and even more rarely punished. Long after society abandoned its formal approval of spousal abuse tolerance of it continued and continues in some circles to this day. 
 
 
 
 "Fortunately, there has been a growing awareness in recent years that no man has a right to abuse any woman under any circumstances. Legislative initiatives designed to educate police, judicial officers and the public, as well as more aggressive investigation and charging policies all signal a concerted effort by the criminal justice system to take spousal abuse seriously. However, a woman who comes before a judge or jury with the claim that she has been battered and suggests that this may be a relevant factor in evaluating her subsequent actions still faces the prospect of being condemned by popular mythology about domestic violence. Either she was not as badly beaten as she claims or she would have left the man long ago. Or, if she was battered that severely, she must have stayed out of some masochistic enjoyment of it. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "If it strains credulity to imagine what the 'ordinary man' would do in the position of a battered spouse, it is probably because men do not typically find themselves in that situation. Some women do, however. The definition of what is reasonable must be adapted to circumstances which are, by and large, foreign to the world inhabited by the hypothetical 'reasonable man'." 
 
 
 