[15]
The guidelines set out in the IC 92-2 were adopted by the Minister to assist in making a determination with respect to requests for cancellation or waiver of interest pursuant to s. 220.(3.1) of the
Act
. The relevant portion of IC 92-2 for the purpose of this proceeding are ss. 5, 6 and 10:
"5. Penalties and interest may be waived or cancelled in whole or in part where they result in circumstances beyond a taxpayer's or employer's control. For example, one of the following extraordinary circumstances may have prevented a taxpayer, a taxpayer's agent, the executor of an estate, or an employer from making a payment when due, or otherwise complying with the
Income Tax Act
:
(a) natural or human-made disasters such as, flood or fire;
(b) civil disturbances or disruptions in services such as, a postal strike;
(c) serious emotional or mental distress such as, death in the immediate family.
"6. Cancelling or waiving interest or penalties may also be appropriate if the interest or penalty arose primarily because of actions of the Department, such as:
(a) processing delays which result in the taxpayer not being informed, within a reasonable time, that an amount was owing;
(b) material available to the public contained errors which led the taxpayers to file returns or make payments based on incorrect information.
(c) a taxpayer or employer receives incorrect advice such as in the case where the Department wrongly advises a taxpayer that no instalment payments will be required for the current year;
(d) errors in processing; or
(e) delays in providing information such as the case where the taxpayer could not make the appropriate instalment or arrears payments because the necessary information was not available.
. . . . .
"10. The following factors will be considered when determining whether or not the Department will cancel or waive interest or penalties:
(a) whether or not the taxpayer or employer has a history of compliance with tax obligations;
(b) whether or not the taxpayer or employer has knowingly allowed a balance to exist upon which arrear interest has accrued;
(c) whether or not the taxpayer or employer has exercised a reasonable amount of care and has not been negligent or careless in conducting their affairs under the self-assessment system;
(d) whether or not the taxpayer or employer has acted quickly to remedy any delay or omission;"