 [24] 
  The test for determining residence in Canada for the purpose of evaluating pension entitlements is set out at paragraphs 30-37 of  
 Singer 
 , above: 
 
 
 
 30 
  The concept of "residence" is the subject of a full chapter of the  
 Regulations 
  starting at section 20. Of particular interest here is the definition found at paragraphs 21(1)(a)11 and (b): 
 
 
 
 21. For the purposes of the Act and these Regulations, 
 
 
 
 ( 
 a 
 ) a person resides in Canada if he makes his home  
 and 
  ordinarily lives in any part of Canada; and 
 
 
 
 ( 
 b 
 ) a person is present in Canada when he is physically present in any part of Canada. [Emphasis added] 
 
 
 
 21. Aux fins de la Loi et du présent règlement, 
 
 
 
 a) 
  une personne réside au Canada si elle établit sa demeure  
 et 
  vit ordinairement dans une région du Canada; et 
 
 
 
 b) 
  une personne est présente au Canada lorsqu'elle se trouve physiquement dans une région du Canada. [mon souligné] 
 
 
 
 31 
  This definition has been applied to a variety of circumstances. As noted by Justice James Russell in Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development) v. Ding, 2005 FC 76, 268 F.T.R. 111 (Ding), one can refer to many factors to determine if a person has made her home and ordinarily lives in Canada as of the date set out in the Act. 
 
 
 
 32 
  Also, as noted by Justice Carolyn Layden-Stevenson in Chhabu, the list of factors enumerated in Ding is not exhaustive. There may well be other factors which become relevant according to the particular circumstances of a case. 
 
 
 
 33 
  It is important to emphasize however that the use of precedent is dangerous in that weight might be given to a factor in a particular set of circumstance that is inappropriate in a different context. Mrs. Singer appears to have fallen in this "trap" for she referred the Court to various summaries of decisions of the RT to support her position. These really have little precedential value in the present context. For example, she noted that in W-76940 v. Minister of Human Resources Development (December 19, 2003), the RT determined that the appellant's Canadian residence began on the day she formalized her intention by applying for permanent residence. 
 
 
 
 34 
  However, she fails to mention that in that case, the appellant had lived in Canada under a tourist visa which had been extended several times and the RT was really looking for indicia as to whether she had made Canada her home12 despite having been absent from the country when her son was working in England. 
 
 
 
 35 
  In S-59142 v. Minister of Human Resources Development(November 2, 2000), the RT found that the appellant had decided to make her home in Canada when she first extended her visitor's visa in 1990. Again, the appellant had already lived in Canada for a year and she extended her visa four times before applying for landed immigrant status because during that period her son was not in a position to sponsor her. 
 
 
 
 36 
  Although each case cited was carefully reviewed by the Court, there is no need to comment further on them for, as mentioned, they do little more than confirm that the test is a fluid one. Sometime the fact that a person has obtained or applied for a permanent status will be relevant while in others it will not. This is true for most factors. 
 
 
 
 37 
  However, presence in Canada at some point in time appears to be of particular importance if not crucial in all cases. There is no doubt that continuous presence is not required. The Regulations as a whole make that very clear as does the case law. But it is difficult to imagine how one can be said to "ordinarily live" in Canada if this person has never actually been in Canada.13 In fact, looking at the overall scheme, including particularly the fact that Parliament thought it appropriate to also provide for a third category of persons in subparagraph 3(1)(b)(i) of the Act that does not rely at all on the concept of residence (those who possess a valid immigrant visa) as well as exceptions in the Regulations for persons as spouses who married a Canadian or permanent resident while they worked outside of the country (paragraph 22(c) in the Regulations), there is little doubt in my mind that presence is, at some point in time, an essential element of this definition. 
 