[1]
Denault, J.
: This is a claim for damages by the plaintiff catering company, Gauvin Enterprises Ltd. ("Gauvin"), arising out of a contract to provide catering services to the Canadian Forces personnel at Canadian Forces Base Chilliwack, Vancouver Detachment ("Base Jericho"), from May 14, 1990 to April 30, 1991.
[2]
Although this action arises from the termination of a single contract, which will hereinafter be referred to as "the 1990 contract", the parties have provided evidence relating to a previous contractual relationship which existed between them in 1989/90. As the events surrounding the earlier contract are important to gaining a proper understanding of the plaintiff's arguments, I will now provide a brief background of the circumstances giving rise to this action, beginning approximately one year prior to the date of commencement of the contract at issue in this case.
Background:
[3]
On April 21, 1989, the plaintiff was invited to bid on a contract to provide catering services to the Canadian Forces personnel at Base Jericho for a term extending from June 1, 1989 to March 31, 1990 (this contract will hereinafter be referred to as "the 1989 contract"). The plaintiff was provided with a tender package which included a document entitled "Request for Proposal", as well as a copy of the contract specifications and the General Conditions, incorporated by reference into the ensuing contract.
[4]
In order to facilitate the bidding process, the caterers were permitted to tour the facilities at Base Jericho. According to the testimony given by Mr. Gordon Gauvin, principal of the plaintiff corporation, certain representations regarding the contract specifications were made to him by the commanding officer of the Base, Major Berge, during his pre-bid visit. Specifically, Mr. Gauvin testified that, while he was touring the facilities, he observed and commented to Major Berge that the staffing in place at the time did not comply with the requirements for "minimum food services staff" as set out in Annex A to the specifications. According to Mr. Gauvin, Major Berge replied that there were a lot of missed meals at the Base and that the caterer staffed accordingly. At the hearing of this matter, Major Berge denied having made such a comment.
[5]
On May 4, 1989, the plaintiff submitted its proposal to the defendant along with a security deposit in the amount of $21,152.32 and a written statement of its understanding of the job description for the Resident Manager and the Executive Chef which included the following:
"f. Carry out - Chapter 3 - Contract Specifications for the supply of food services or food and food services."
[6]
On May 17, 1989, the plaintiff was awarded the 1989 contract and deposited, as security, the sum of $38,410.43. Pursuant to the contract, the plaintiff was to provide catering services to the Canadian Forces Personnel at Base Jericho "
in accordance with the Contract Specification for the Supply of Food and Food Services
" from June 1, 1989 to March 31, 1990, at a total estimated contract price of $192,052.14. The contract price was based on estimated ration days and the ration day charge [see footnote 1].
[7]
In the fall of 1989, there were complaints about the quality of the food and level of service being offered by the plaintiff at Base Jericho. On January 12, 1990, Major Berge recommended in a report that the plaintiff's contract be terminated. On January 24, 1990, a meeting was held between the defendant's representatives and Mr. Gauvin at which time the plaintiff was given notice that the contract specifications, particularly the requirements for "minimum food services staff", were not being met. Following a 48 hour period of observation, Major Berge reported that both Messes being serviced by the plaintiff were considered to be short staffed and that a number of problems still existed concerning food quality. However, because there had been a "definite improvement in the quality and quality of food services", it was decided not to terminate the contract.
[8]
In February 1990, Major Berge was replaced by Major Monro as Commander of Base Jericho. The plaintiff continued to provide its catering services to the end of the term of the 1989 contract.
[9]
Prior to the expiry of the 1989 contract, the plaintiff was asked to continue to provide its catering services on an interim basis pending the award of the 1990 contract. The plaintiff agreed to do so and provided the services at amended prices from April 1, 1990 to May 13, 1990.
[10]
In April 1990, the plaintiff and several other catering companies were invited to bid on a new catering contract which was to run from May 14, 1990 to April 30, 1991 ("the 1990 contract"). Once again, the plaintiff received a tender package containing a document entitled "Request for Proposal", as well as a copy of the contract specifications and the General Conditions, incorporated by reference into the 1990 contract.
[11]
It appears from the evidence, that the new Base Commander, Major Monro, met with Mr. Gauvin prior to the date on which the plaintiff submitted its bid, in order to discuss the Commander's wish to extend meal hours. It should be noted that the tender documents did not reflect the extended meal hours proposed by Major Monro. On April 26, 1990, the plaintiff submitted its proposal, signed and dated by Mr. Gordon Gauvin, outlining the pricing details for which the plaintiff would perform its duties, as described in the tender documents. In addition, the plaintiff submitted a "
bid security deposit
" in the amount of $29,631 and a security certification which was signed and "under seal" and which stated:
"(I/We) understand and agree that if
(3) I/we fail to supply the requisite contract financial security;
my/our security deposit will be forfeited in the amount of the difference in the bid price and the value of the subsequent contract up to the value of my/our security deposit. In witness whereof I/we have executed this agreement under my/our hand and seal."
[12]
On May 7, 1990, the plaintiff advised the defendant, in writing, that it had reviewed its prices on the proposal and was confident that it would complete the contract as specified.
[13]
The plaintiff was awarded the "1990 contract" on May 9, 1990. A printed form contract was prepared and forwarded to the plaintiff, setting out the basic details of the contract from the Request for Proposal form, including the pricing details for the catering services and the terms of the contract, with the signature of an officer of the Department of Supply and Services on the document. Pursuant to this contract, the plaintiff was to provide for the supply of food and food services to the Canadian Forces Personnel at Base Jericho, "
in accordance with the contract specifications for the supply of food services or food and food services
" from May 14, 1990 to April 30, 1991, at a total estimated contract price of $301,325.75. Once again, the contract price was based on estimated ration days and the ration day charge.
[14]
Shortly after being awarded the 1990 contract, Mr. Gauvin was invited to speak with Major Monro about the extended meal hours discussed prior to the plaintiff's bid. The evidence reveals that the two men had a disagreement at this meeting when Mr. Gauvin took the position that the contract price would have to be increased if the Commander insisted on extended meal hours, as the tender documents on which the plaintiff's bid was calculated did not provide for any such extensions.
[15]
The evidence reveals that, in the weeks that followed, the plaintiff's staffing practices were closely monitored by Master Seaman Beaton and Warrant Officer Taylor, at the request of Major Monro.
[16]
On June 13, 1990, the plaintiff received a letter from E.J. Lensink of Supply and Services Canada advising that the plaintiff had 48 hours to correct identified deficiencies in meeting the contract specifications set out in Chapter 3, Annex A, failing which the defendant would "exercise the remedies available under the terms and conditions of the Contract". The plaintiff also received a second notice on June 13, 1990, from Ms. L. Sutton of Supply and Services Canada, indicating that the defendant had not yet received the plaintiff's security deposit in the amount of $60,265.15, as required by the contract, and that the plaintiff was being granted until 9:00 a.m. on June 15, 1990, to forward the sum to the defendant's office.
[17]
On June 14, 1990, the plaintiff, through its solicitor, forwarded a reply to the defendant's letter regarding its security deposit. On June 15, 1990, the defendant notified the plaintiff in writing that the 1990 contract was terminated in accordance with section 18 of the General Conditions of the contract.
[18]
Following the termination of the plaintiff's contract, the defendant entered into a contract with Glacier Catering & Bar Services Ltd. ("Glacier"), at a total estimated contract price of $338,077.60.
[19]
The plaintiff now seeks damages for the wrongful repudiation of its 1990 contract with the defendant, as well as the return of its bid security deposit in the amount of $29,631.
The Plaintiff's Position:
[20]
The plaintiff's position is that it was not in default in carrying out any of its obligations under the 1990 contract. Consequently, the plaintiff maintains that its contract with the defendant was wrongfully terminated and that its losses should be compensated in damages. In the alternative, the plaintiff contends that the defendant waived its right or is estopped from enforcing its right to rely on the plaintiff's failure to comply with the contractual staffing requirements, as the defendant condoned or acquiesced in the plaintiff's staffing practices throughout its commercial dealings with the plaintiff.
The Defendant's Position:
[21]
The defendant argus that the termination of the plaintiff's contract on June 15, 1990, was justified, as the plaintiff had defaulted in carrying out the express terms and conditions of the 1990 contract regarding both the
staffing requirements
outlined in the specifications and the
contract security deposit
. In addition, the defendant contends that it never waived its right to rely on the plaintiff's failure to comply with the contractual staffing requirements, nor did it condone or acquiesce in the plaintiff's staffing practices.
Discussion:
[22]
Although the plaintiff in a claim for damages for wrongful termination of a contract must prove the losses he has suffered as a result of the defendant's actions, it is the
defendant
who bears the onus of establishing that the termination was justified and in accordance with the terms of the contract FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED.
[23]
In this case, the defendant relies on section 18 of the General Conditions of the contract, which states:
"(1) Where the Contractor is in default in carrying out any of its obligations under the Contract, the Minister may, upon giving notice to the Contractor, terminate for default the whole or any part of the Contract, either immediately or at the expiration of a cure period specified in the notice, where the Contractor has not cured the default to the satisfaction of the Minister within the said cure period."
As stated above, the defendant contends that it was justified in terminating the plaintiff's contract as the plaintiff (1) failed to comply with the contractual specifications setting out the minimum staffing requirements and (2) failed to submit the contract security in accordance with the contract.
[24]
Dealing firstly with the "staffing" issue, it should be noted, at the outset, that the parties agree that the specifications referred to by the defendant formed part of the 1990 contract [see footnote 2]. The relevant provision of the specifications reads, in part, as follows:
"Section 2
Action By Caterer
"302. Food Services Staff - Composition And Medical Requirements
1. The Caterer shall provide:
c. a minimum Food Services staff, as specified in Annex A, qualified to prepare and serve meals that are acceptable to the Contract Supervisor. The Staffing Guide (Annex A) applies to
continuous feeding situations
. It is the ration of staff to diners which has proven to be the most effective for the operation of food services facilities with two eight hour shifts, where three meals are provided, seven days a week. ..." (emphasis added)
[25]
Annex A sets out minimum staffing levels based on "ration strength". As stated above, ration strength is based on the numbers of diners "entitled" to rations on any given day. Weekly forecasts of the daily ration strength for both messes on the Base were provided to the plaintiff by the defendant, in advance, and formed the basis for the Daily Ration Entitlement Statements, used by the plaintiff to prepare its invoices.
[26]
The plaintiff argues that it did not breach the contract specifications during the term of its contract since
Chapter 3, Annex A
and
paragraph 302.1.c.
itself, indicate that the caterer is only required to staff according to the levels set out in Annex A in "continuous feeding situations". The situation at Base Jericho being something of a different nature, the plaintiff contends that it was not required to maintain the staffing levels outlined in Chapter 3, Annex A.
[27]
According to the plaintiff, although "ration strength" or "ration entitlement" figures were used by the plaintiff in calculating the amount owing by the defendant under the contract, these estimates were not required to be followed for staffing purposes, as many of the people
entitled
to rations never ate their meals in the Messes. The plaintiff argues that insisting on the staffing levels set out in Annex A would have resulted in there being more staff than diners on certain occasions. As a result, the plaintiff contends that the Staffing Guide provided at Annex A was not applicable to the typical Base Jericho scenario as the significant number of missed meals prevented it from reasonably being considered a "
continuous feeding situation
".
[28]
I cannot accept the plaintiff's argument on this issue. Although the term "
continuous feeding situation
" is not defined in the general "definitions" section of the specifications, I find that the term is properly defined in the sentence which follows the sentence in which the phrase is used in paragraph 302.1.c. In my opinion, therefore, the provision defines a "
continuous feeding situation
" as occurring "
where three meals are provided, seven days a week
". As this was the situation at Base Jericho at the time of the plaintiff's 1990 contract, I find that the plaintiff was required to respect the minimum staffing levels outlined in Annex A, Chapter 3 and that the fact that the number of actual diners was very often inferior to the "ration strength" figure provided by the defendant did not alter the plaintiff's obligations in regards to staffing.
[29]
The evidence presented at the hearing of this matter clearly establishes that the plaintiff's staffing levels were greatly inferior to those set out in Chapter 3, Annex A of the specifications during the term of its 1990 contract. In fact, the plaintiff admitted to the court that, if the defendant's position on the application of the specifications was found to be correct, then the plaintiff provided staffing levels which were short of those required.
[30]
In spite of the plaintiff's admission and this court's finding that the staffing levels outlined in Chapter Annex A were required to be maintained, the plaintiff contends that the defendant could not terminate the plaintiff's 1990 contract based on the plaintiff's staffing deficiencies, as the defendant "
waived
" its contractual right to do so when it condoned or acquiesced in the plaintiff's staffing practices. This argument is based on the equitable doctrine of "estoppel" or "waiver". The terms "estoppel" and "waiver" have often been used interchangeably in caselaw. (See
Mitchell & Jewell Ltd. v. Canadian Pacific Express Co.
(1974), 44 D.L.R.(3d) 603 (Alta. C.A.);
Ogilvy v. Hope-Davies
, [1976] 1 All E.R. 683.) The plaintiff has not drawn a distinction between the terms in its arguments. Consequently, the court will also use these words interchangeably, as they were presented by the plaintiff.
[31]
The principle of estoppel was first expressed by Lord Cairns in the case of
Hughes v. Metropolitan Railway Co.
(1877), 2 App. Cas. 439, in the following terms:
"It is the first principle upon which all courts of equity proceed, that if parties, who have entered into definite and distinct terms, involving certain legal results - certain penalties or legal forfeiture - afterwards by their own act or with their own consent, enter upon a course of negotiation which has the effect of leading one of the parties to suppose that the strict rights arising under the contract will not be enforced, or will be kept in suspense, or held in abeyance, the person who otherwise might have enforced those rights will not be allowed to enforce them where it would be inequitable, having regard to the dealings which have thus taken place between the parties."
[32]
The doctrine has since been applied by the Supreme Court of Canada in a number of cases. (See
Conwest Exploration Co. v. Letain
, [1964] S.C.R. 20;
Burrows (John) Ltd. v. Subsurface Surveys Ltd. et al.
, [1968] S.C.R. 607, and
Canadian Superior Oil Ltd. v. Paddon-Hughes Development Co.
, [1970] S.C.R. 932.)
[33]
The plaintiff argues that, by not requiring full performance of the contractual staffing requirements during the term of the
1989 contract
and throughout the interim period extending from April 1, 1990 to May 14, 1990, the defendant "waived" its strict legal right under the
1990 contract
to terminate the plaintiff's contract based on deficiencies in staffing levels. The plaintiff also relies on Mr.Gauvin's testimony in regards to the representation made by Major Berge at the pre-bid meeting which took place prior to the
1989 contract
. According to the plaintiff, this "promise" made by a representative of the defendant, that it would not insist on the full performance of the plaintiff's staffing obligations as set out in the specifications, results in the defendant now being estopped from relying on its contractual right to terminate the plaintiff's 1990 contract based on a breach of the specifications with respect to staffing levels.
[34]
The defendant argues that the plaintiff cannot base its action or found its claim on the equitable doctrine of estoppel. This argument refers to the maxim that estoppel can never be used as a sword but only as a shield. In my view, the plaintiff in this case may invoke the doctrine of estoppel
in defence
of the claim that the defendant was justified in terminating its 1990 contract with the plaintiff. As it is the defendant who bears the onus of establishing a justification for its actions, I feel that the plaintiff has raised this equitable doctrine in appropriate circumstances.
[35]
It is, however, my view, that the plaintiff's arguments based on the doctrine of estoppel/waiver must fail. Firstly, the words and conduct relied upon by the plaintiff occurred prior to the date of commencement of the 1990 contract. In this regard, I accept the defendant's argument that evidence of conduct or words of the defendant's representatives, made outside the term of the contract at issue (in this case, the "1990 contract"), cannot be used to establish forbearance either as estoppel or waiver. (In this regard, see
Secretary of State for Employment v. Globe Elastic Thread Co.
, [1980] A.C. 506; [1979] 2 All E.R. 1077 (H.L.).) In this regard, the provisions contained in a subsequent contract, concluded with Glacier, are also irrelevant. (See
Canadian Superior Oil v. Hambly
, [1970] S.C.R. 932, at p. 938.)
[36]
Even if the court accepted such evidence, I find that the plaintiff has failed to establish a clear and unequivocal intention on the part of the defendant to waive its rights, under the contract, to rely on the plaintiff's failure to meet its obligations with respect to staffing levels [see footnote 3]. In my opinion, the events which occurred in January 1990, clearly demonstrate that the defendant continued to insist on the full performance of the specifications. At most, the plaintiff might have shown that the defendant granted the plaintiff certain "indulgences" with respect to the staffing requirements under its previous contract with the defendant. However, the Supreme Court of Canada, in the case of
John Burrows Ltd. v. Subsurface Surveys Ltd. et al.
, supra, held that merely taking advantage of indulgences granted by one party is not enough to create an estoppel.
[37]
Defendant's counsel also objected to the evidence presented by the plaintiff, relating to representations made outside the 1990 contract, on the basis that such evidence cannot be used to vary or contradict the written terms of the 1990 contract. In this regard, the defendant relied on the "Entire Agreement" clause contained in the General Conditions of the 1990 contract, which reads as follows:
"9329-1 36 Entire Agreement
"The Contract constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter of the Contract and supersedes all previous negotiations, communications and other agreements whether written or oral, relating to it, unless they are incorporated by reference in the Contract. There are no terms, obligations, covenants, representations, statements or conditions other than those contained in the Contract."
[38]
In my opinion, the parties in this case intended that the written 1990 contract would represent the entire agreement concluded between them. By his own admission, Mr. Gauvin was not willing to accede to the defendant's request for extended meal hours, as the contract did not provide for such extensions. I also find that there was no overriding oral warranty or oral promise made by the defendant prior to the 1990 contract, that the written contract would not be enforced in accordance with its terms.
[39]
For the foregoing reasons, I find that the plaintiff failed to comply with the contract specifications which established minimum staffing requirements and that the defendant was not estopped from relying on its right to terminate the plaintiff's 1990, in accordance with Section 18 of the General Conditions, based on the plaintiff's failure to carry out its obligations with respect to staffing. Consequently, I find that the [defendant] was justified in terminating the plaintiff's 1990 contract on June 15, 1990.
[40]
Although it is no longer necessary to determine whether the defendant was justified in terminating the plaintiff's 1990 contract based on the plaintiff's alleged failure to submit the contract security deposit in the amount of $60,265.15, in accordance with the terms of the contract, the court must determine whether the plaintiff is entitled to a return of its
bid security deposit
in the amount of $29,631.
[41]
The relevant provision of the 1990 contract is contained in the "security deposit clause" which reads, in part, as follows:
"2(a) The Contractor shall deposit with the Minister a security deposit in the amount of $60,265.15 within TEN (10) days of the contract date. If the Minister does not, for any reason, receive within the specified period the contract executed by the Contractor and the security deposit in the amount set out above, the Minister may retain the bid security provided and may accept any offer, seek new bids, negotiate a contract or not accept any bids as the Minister may deem advisable."
[42]
The plaintiff's completed proposal also included the following relevant provisions:
"1. Enclosed with our bid is the requested security consisting of:
(a) security deposit in the amount of $29,631, being not less than 10 per cent of the bid price.
"3. If requested, we will provide contract financial security as above within 10 days of contract award.
If the Minister does not, for any reason, receive within the specified period the contract executed by us and the financial security described above, he may retain the bid security
and may accept any offer, seek new bids, negotiate a contract or not accept any bids, as the Minister may deem advisable.
"Security Deposit:
"The security deposit shall be held by Her Majesty
as security for entry into contract and the furnishing of required contract security acceptable to the Crown
. In the event of any default or nonperformance by the bidder, the said sum shall be forfeited to Her Majesty, up to the amount of the difference between the bid price and the amount of the contract entered into by the Crown for the work, supplies and services which are specified in this bid ..." (emphasis added)
[43]
In support of its claim that the plaintiff forfeited its bid security deposit when it failed to supply the requisite contract financial security in accordance with the terms of the contract, the defendant also relies on the "security deposit certification" form signed and executed under seal by the plaintiff and submitted with its proposal on April 26, 1990 [see footnote 4].
[44]
In defence to the allegations that its bid security deposit was forfeited, the plaintiff points to the explanation provided in its letter to the defendant dated June 14, 1990, which reads in part as follows:
"... A bid security deposit of $29,631 for the subject contract has already been posted. In addition, Gauvin Enterprises Ltd.'s security for the contract for the 1989 year remains on deposit with Supply and Services Canada. That security is in the amount of approximately $38,000 plus accumulated interest.
"Mr. Gauvin anticipated that the bid security for the 1990 contract and the security paid for the 1989 contract would be applied to Gauvin Enterprises Ltd.'s security obligations as described in L. Sutton's letter of June 13, 1990. Indeed, Mr. Gauvin advises that he confirmed that this would be the case with Mr. Ab Jenner who is with National Defence. Applying the outstanding deposits against the $60,265.15 there still remains an amount payable to Gauvin Enterprises Ltd. and I would ask that the sum be forwarded without delay."
[45]
At the hearing, Ms. Leslie Sutton of the Department of Supply and Services responded to the explanation provided in the June 14th letter by stating that, although the defendant was in possession of both the plaintiff's bid security deposit of $29,631 for the
1990 contract
and its
1989 contract
security in the amount of $38,410.43, plus accumulated interest, at the time of the notice dated June 13, 1990, the plaintiff should have provided the defendant with specific written instructions that it expected the
1989
security deposit to be used to "top up" the contract security for the
1990 contract
. Ms. Sutton testified that she had already authorized the release of the 1989 security deposit at the time of the plaintiff's letter and that the sums could not, therefore, be applied to the 1990 security deposit by the June 15th deadline, as required.
[46]
The defendant argues that, since it did not receive the plaintiff's contract security, in a form found to be "acceptable to the Crown", by 9:00 on June 15, 1990, the defendant was in breach of its contractual obligations and the defendant was, therefore, justified in retaining the plaintiff's bid deposit in the amount of $29,631.
[47]
I must disagree with the defendant's position on this issue. At the outset, it should be noted that the terms of the 1990 contract do not allow the defendant to retain the plaintiff's bid security deposit in the event that the plaintiff has breached
any
of its contractual obligations. The provisions relating to the plaintiff's obligation to supply a security deposit must be distinguished, in this respect, with section 18 of the General Conditions which authorizes the defendant to
terminate
the contract where the contractor is found to be in default in carrying out "
any
of its obligations under the contract". It appears to me that the bid security required to be submitted with a contractor's proposal is intended to secure the approved contractor's "entry into the contract" and may only be retained by the defendant in the event that the balance owing on the full security deposit (in this case, $60,265.15) is not forwarded to the defendant within 10 days of the contract date. In my opinion, the defendant cannot claim that this requirement was not met, as 10 days following the contract date, it was in possession of a greater amount of money belonging to the plaintiff, than was required.
[48]
In response to the defendant's claim that written instructions were needed to use one security deposit to "top up" another, the court finds that the letter sent to the defendant by the plaintiff on June 14, 1990 (thus before the 9:00 June 15 deadline set out the notice) satisfies this requirement. Consequently, the court finds that the defendant is required to return the plaintiff's bid security deposit in the amount of $29,631, plus accumulated interest.
[49]
For the foregoing reasons, the plaintiff's action is allowed with respect to the return of its bid security deposit but it is dismissed with regards to its claim for damages for wrongful termination of contract, each party bearing its own costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sms
Footnotes
1.	Ration days represent the number of diners
entitled
to rations on any given day. Weekly forecasts of ration days were prepared by the defendant and provided to the plaintiff, in advance, for the following week. The weekly forecasts set out what is referred to as "
the daily ration strength
", which formed the basis for the "Daily Ration Entitlement Statements" used by the plaintiff to prepare its invoices.
2.	The specifications were incorporated into the contract by the following express term, set out at p. 2 of the 1990 contract:
"Requirement:
"To provide for the supply of food and food services for the Canadian Forces Personnel at Canadian Forces Base Chilliwack, Vancouver Detachment, 4050 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.
in accordance with the 'contract specifications for the supply of food services or food and food services
' acknowledged to be already in your possession during the period from 14 May 1990 to 30 April 1991." (emphasis added)
3.	It has been held that the party who intends to rely on the equitable doctrine of estoppel must show a "clear and unequivocal intention" on the part of the other party to relinquish its rights under a contract. See
Scandinavian Trading Tanker Co. A.B. v. Flota Perolera Ecuatoriana (The Scaptrade)
, [1981] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 425, at p. 431;
Federal Business Development Bank v. Steinbock Development Corp.
(1983), 42 A.R. 221 (C.A.), and
Roclar Leasing Ltd. v. MacMillan Bloedel Ltd.
(1988), 63 O.R.(2d) 669 (H.C.), at p. 679, affirmed by the Ont. C.A. January 31, 1991 C.A. 316/88.
4.	To avoid having to refer to earlier portions of these reasons, the certification is once again reproduced:
"(I/we) understand and agree that if
(3) I/we fail to supply the requisite contract financial security;
my/our security deposit will be forfeited in the amount of the difference in the bid price and the value of the subsequent contract up to the value of my/our security deposit. In witness whereof I/we have executed this agreement under my/our hand and seal."
[End of document]
