[17]
In any event, as had been pointed out in
Muliadi v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1986] 2 F.C. 205; 66 N.R. 8; 18 Admin. L.R. 243, 60-85 (F.C.A.), the duty of fairness requires, wherever possible and practical, that the applicant be provided with an opportunity to confront concerns such as those before the visa officer, to address them and to answer them. I see no reason why this should not occur here. In
Muliadi
, the appellant's application for permanent residence based on the entrepreneurial category was refused on the basis of an adverse assessment by the Province of Ontario without according the appellant any opportunity to correct or contradict it. Stone, J.A., for the court, found that the duty of fairness had been breached by the visa officer. He stated (at F.C. 215):
"I think it was the officer's duty before disposing of the application to inform the appellant of the negative assessment and to give him a fair opportunity of correcting or contradicting it before making the decision required by statute. It is, I think, the same sort of opportunity that was spoken of by the House of Lords in
Board of Education v. Rice
, [1911] A.C. 179 in those oft-quoted words of Lord Loreburn, L.C., at page 182:
'They can obtain information in any way they think best, always giving a fair opportunity to those who are parties in the controversy for correcting or contradicting any relevant statement prejudicial to their view.'
"Those words have application here even though a full hearing was not contemplated. (
Kane v. Board of Governor's of the University of British Columbia
, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 1105 at p. 1113; see also
Randolph et al. v. The Queen
(1966), Ex. C.R. 157 at page 164.)"
He also observed (at F.C. 215-216) that "in deciding whether the appellant was accorded procedural fairness, it is necessary to examine the legislative framework in which the visa officer was required to decide the matter". Although in that instance the framework did not require a full oral hearing before the visa officer's decision could be made, Stone, J.A., nevertheless found that the duty to act fairly in the circumstances required that the appellant be given the "opportunity of meeting the negative assessment by the provincial authorities before it was acted upon by the visa officer". He concluded, based on the following views expressed by Lord Parker, C.J., in
In re H.K. (An Infant)
, [1967] 2 Q.B. 617, at p. 630, that the duty to act fairly extends to this type of administrative decision-making process:
"This, as it seems to me, is a very different case, and I doubt whether it can be said that the immigration authorities are acting in a judicial or quasi-judicial capacity as those terms are generally understood. But at the same time, I myself think that
even if an immigration officer is not in a judicial or quasi-judicial capacity, he must at any rate give the immigrant an opportunity of satisfying him of the matters in the subsection, and for that purpose let the immigrant know what his immediate impression is so that the immigrant can disabuse him. That is not, as I see it, a question of acting or being required to act judicially, but of being required to act fairly.
Good administration and an honest or bona fide decision must, as it seems to me, require not merely impartiality, nor merely bringing one's mind to bear on the problem, but acting fairly; and to the limited extent that the circumstances of any particular case allow, and within the legislative framework under which the administrator is working, only to that limited extent do the so-called rules of natural justice apply, which in a case such as this is merely a duty to act fairly." (Emphasis added)