[8]
The Court of Appeal first considered s. 63 in
Weerasinge v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1994] 1 F.C. 330; 161 N.R. 200 (F.C.A.). The only Refugee Division member to sign the reasons in that case noted in the final decision that:
"The hearing was held before myself and my colleague, Vara Singh. Ms. Singh ceased to hold office as a member of the Refugee Division and is therefore unable to take part in the disposition of this matter. Accordingly, pursuant to section 63(2) of the
Immigration Act
, my decision shall constitute the decision of the Refugee Division in this case. [see footnote 6]"
The final decision was signed by the remaiing member some seven months after the hearing. The failure to hand down the decision within the eight weeks provided for in s. 63(1) was not explained. The Court of Appeal held that reliance upon s. 63(2) was not justified (pages 334-5):
"
There is nothing else on the record that explains why only one member made the decision
. By (the date the decision was issued), the presiding member had, it is clear, been out of office for more than eight weeks
and was disqualified from participating in the decision
.
. . . . .
"The rights assured by section 7 of the
Charter
[
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, being Part I of the
Constitution Act
, 1982, Schedule B,
Canada Ac
t 1982
, 1982, c. 11 (U.K.) [R.S.C., 1985, Appendix II, No. 44]] are put in issue when a claim to be a Convention refugee is made. Absent consent, a claimant is entitled to a hearing by a two member panel and is entitled to the benefit of any disagreement between them. Recourse to subsection 63(2) is a serious matter which denies a claimant a right accorded by the
Act
. A decision made by a single member is prima facie made without jurisdiction. When a claimant consents to or requests a hearing by a single member, that must be, as it invariably has been, clearly put on the record. It should be likewise when recourse has been had to subsection 63(2).
"As a matter of law and to ensure that justice is seen to have been done, when subsection 63(2) is properly engaged a complete statement of the material circumstances should be put on the record. Such statement may, of course, be included in the reasons for decision." (emphasis added)