 [17] 
  In the case at bar, counsel for the Plaintiff points to several other provisions in the  
 Act 
  which require the person affected by a statutory forfeiture to act within stipulated times. In particular, he refers to s. 25 which obliges a person seeking a ministerial review to give written notice to that effect within 90 days. There the  
 Act 
  uses the word "may" which, in that context, indicates that the person has a choice to make. Whether that time stipulation is mandatory or directory is not for me to decide in this case. The Applicant points out, however, that such statutory provisions by which powers are enforced, rights are protected or immunities are engaged are often required to be rigorously observed. In  
 McCain Foods Ltd. v. National Transportation Agency and Canadian Pacific Ltd. 
 , [1993] 1 F.C. 583; 152 N.R. 166; [1992] F.C.J. No. 1061 (F.C.A.), at pages 5-6, this point was made in the following passage: 
 
 
 
 "The case of  
 Ottawa-Carleton (Regional Municipality) v. Canada Employment and Immigration Commission 
  is of no assistance to the appellant. There, an application for a premium rate reduction had been filed outside the time limits prescribed by the Unemployment Insurance Regulations. The Court rejected the argument which attempted to qualify such a requirement as being directory rather than mandatory. It held that such a reading would make the provision meaningless as it would read it out of the legislation altogether. Hugessen, J.A., for the Court distinguished the  
 Normandin 
  case by saying: 
 
 
 
 'Where apparently imperative words in a statute, such as the "shall" in issue here, have been interpreted as being only directory, it has always, as far as I know, been in situations where the failure to act timely might produce unfortunate consequences, not so much for the actor but for some innocent party.' 
 
 
 
 He concluded: 
 
 
 
 'I am not aware of any case, and none was cited, where the apparently mandatory time period set for the assertion of a claim by the party claiming has been held to be purely directory.'"