[27]
In my opinion, the absence of provision in the
Act
for extending the time to file an application under s. 44(1) for a review of a decision to disclose information, is not an absolute bar in an appropriate case to consideration of an application filed late, or a later application to amend an application made within the prescribed time. If authority be needed for that extraordinary jurisdiction, I would find it under the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended. Section 2(1) defines "Rules" as meaning "provisions of law and rules and orders made under s. 46", and s. 46 provides in part
"46(1) Subject to the approval of the Governor-in-Council ... the rules committee [appointed pursuant to s. 45.1] may make general rules and orders.
. . . . .
(c) for the effectual execution and working of any Act by or under which any jurisdiction is conferred on the court or any division of it or on any judge of the court in respect of proceedings in the court and the attainment of the intention and objects of that Act including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing, a rule deeming any jurisdiction conferred on the court or a judge to have been conferred on a specified division of the court.
. . . . .
"(2) Rules and orders made under this section may extend to matters arising out of or in the course of proceedings under any Act involving practice and procedure or otherwise, for which no provision is made by that Act or any other Act but for which it is found necessary to provide in order to ensure the proper working of that Act and the better attainment of its objects."
While this case was not argued in these terms, it is my view that the absence of provision in the
Access to Information Act
for an extension of time to apply under s. 44(1), or for amendment, of an application that was filed within the time prescribed, after that time has elapsed, is not a bar to the exercise of the court's discretion to permit either course, upon application, where that is necessary "to ensure the proper working of that Act (i.e., the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1), and the better attainment of its objects". In such a case, the court acting in accord with rule 5, the so-called "gap rule", may provide for an extension of time, by analogy to what it may do in regard to a regular application for judicial review under s. 18.1(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, and rule 1614. Similarly, in an appropriate case, the court may allow an amendment to the original application under s. 44(1), by analogy to the provisions set out in rules 424 and 427.