[35]
The respondent submits that paragraph 20(1)(b) cannot apply to the evaluation report because it was not supplied to PWC by the applicant, a third party, but rather by a "fourth party", a consultant retained by PWC. That does not preclude the application of this provision, in my view, for "third party" is defined by the
Act
, s. 2, as including any party other than one that requests information or the government institution. The respondent's suggestion of a "fourth party" is merely another description for another third party under the
Act
. The Record was clearly provided by a third party, the consultant, even though that was not the applicant, who is also a third party. I note that at the hearing the applicant did not claim the Record was exempt from disclosure under paragraph 20(1)(b), but the supplementary affidavit of Mr. Couture does describe it, as well as the Proposal, as containing "confidential, financial, commercial, scientific and technical information which has consistently been treated in a confidential manner by P.E.I. Crossing Ventures and S.N.C.-Lavalin Inc.". There is evidence from the Record itself that it was treated as confidential for on the coversheet of the Record the word Confidential is stamped in capital letters approximately ½ inch high and the word is also hand printed in capital letters, in close association with a handwritten code apparently for filing purposes or other numbering of the document. I am prepared to assume that the document was treated as confidential by the consultant, the third party who supplied the information to PWC. So treating the Record, as confidential, would be consistent with a professional consultant's responsibility, for the Record purports to be an evaluation report of a project proposal submitted by the applicant, which the applicant consistently treated as restricted from disclosure, and had so indicated in the preamble included in each volume of its Proposal, except for any use by PWC for evaluation purposes. On this basis I accept that the Record, which relates to a tunnel project, as well as the Proposal, which relates to a bridge project, is confidential information within paragraph 20(1)(b), at least in the sense that each of the third parties who submitted the information to PWC treated it as confidential.