 [12] 
  Although the  
 Transfer of Offenders Act 
 , was repealed and replaced by the  
 International Transfer of Offenders Act 
 , R.S.C. 2004, c. 21, the latter was not in effect when the applicant was transferred to Canada in 2003. As such, for the purposes of this judicial review, the provisions of the  
 Transfer of Offenders Act 
  will apply. The pertinent sections of said  
 Act 
  are as follows: 
 
 
 
 "4. Where a Canadian offender is transferred to Canada, his finding of guilt and sentence, if any, by a court of the foreign state from which he is transferred is deemed to be a finding of guilt and a sentence imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction in Canada for a criminal offence. 
 
 
 
 "11. A Canadian offender transferred to Canada shall, at the date of the transfer, be credited with any time toward completion of a sentence imposed by a court of a foreign state that, at that date, had actually been spent in confinement in the foreign state or that was credited, by the foreign state, towards completion of the sentence. 
 
 
 
 "11.1(1) Where a Canadian offender transferred to Canada is detained in a penitentiary, the offender is entitled to be released on statutory release on the day on which the offender has served the portion of the sentence that remains to be served after deducting the portion of the sentence with which the offender was credited in accordance with section 11 
 
 
 
 a) any credits, given by the foreign state, towards release before the expiration of the sentence; and 
 
 
 
 b) one third of the portion of the sentence that remains to be served after deducting the portion referred to in paragraph (a). 
 
 
 
 "(2) Where a Canadian offender transferred to Canada is detained in a prison, the offender is entitled to be released on the day on which the offender has served the portion of the sentence that remains to be served after deducting the portion with which the offender was credited in accordance with section 11 less 
 
 
 
 a) any credits, given by the foreign state, towards release before the expiration of the sentence; 
 
 
 
 b) the amount of any remission granted, pursuant to the Prisons and Reformatories Act, on the portion of the sentence that remains to be served after deducting the portion referred to in paragraph (a). 
 
 
 
 "12 Subject to sections 11 and 11.1, a Canadian offender transferred to Canada is subject to the Corrections and Conditional Release Act or the Prisons and Reformatories Act, as the case may be, as if the offender had been convicted and the sentence imposed by a court in Canada." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      