[8]
Speaking for a unanimous Court of Appeal Justice Décary summarized the findings of Justice MacKay and examined the government's policy regarding the revocation of citizenship of suspected war criminals. In this latter regard he said:
"28. The policy of the Canadian government has been to seek the revocation of the citizenship of suspected war criminals. Canada's policy has been published annually, since the decision to take action against such persons was taken. The policy at the relevant period is as stated in a Public Report entitled
Canada's War Crimes Program 2000-2001
:
'The policy of the Government of Canada is clear. Canada will not become a safe haven for those individuals who have committed war crimes, crimes against humanity or any other reprehensible act during times of conflict.
'Over the past several years, the Government of Canada has taken significant measures, both within and outside of our borders, to ensure that appropriate enforcement action is taken against suspected war criminals, regardless of when or where the crimes occurred. These measures include co-operation with international courts, foreign governments and enforcement action by one of the three departments mandated to deliver Canada's War Crimes Program.
'Canada is actively involved in supporting the International Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Rwanda (ICTR) and has ratified both the International Criminal Court Statute (ICC) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts. Canada was the first country to introduce comprehensive legislation incorporating the provisions of the ICC Statute into domestic law. This legislation,
The Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes
Act
, came into force on October 23, 2000.
. . . . .
'
World War II Cases
. . . . .
'The government pursues
only
those cases for which there is evidence of direct involvement in or complicity of war crimes or crimes against humanity. A person is considered complicit if, while aware of the commission of war crimes or crimes against humanity, the person contributes, directly or indirectly, to their occurrence. Membership in an organization responsible for committing the atrocities can be sufficient for complicity if the organization in question is one with a single, brutal purpose, e.g. a death squad.' (Underline in the original)
"29. In her report to the Governor in Council, the Minister described the policy in the following terms:
'It is the policy of the Government of Canada that this country will not offer safe haven to those individuals who have committed a war crime, a crime against humanity or any other reprehensible act during times of conflict, regardless of when or where these crimes occurred. Furthermore, it is the position of the government that revocation of citizenship and deportation is an appropriate remedy against an individual, who, while aware of the commission of war crimes or crimes against humanity, contributes directly or indirectly to their occurrence.'
"30. It is common ground that policy guidelines are not binding and do not create legitimate expectations of substantive rights. It was open to the Governor in Council not to establish guidelines and, perhaps, not to follow them. However, the Governor in Council, having opted in this case to adopt guidelines and to apply them to the case, must then put its mind to determining whether Mr. Oberlander comes within their scope. This duty is indeed recognized in the case at bar by the Attorney General of Canada at para. 67 of his factum where he states: 'The Governor in Council was required to consider whether Oberlander fell within the ambit of government policy.'" (References omitted)