[10]
After a discussion on the applicable standards of review for both the decision of the judge of this Court and the Governor in Council, Justice Décary concluded as follows:
"57. The reviewing Judge was clearly wrong in finding that Mr. Oberlander's interests are 'peripheral elements' and I fail to see any evidence or indication that they were considered at all. In her Report prepared without consideration of the additional submissions filed by Mr. Oberlander, the Minister states that 'Mr. Oberlander raised no humanitarian or compassionate considerations in his submissions' (A.B. vol. 1, p. 41). (I hasten to observe that the words 'humanitarian and compassionate considerations' do not appear in the
Citizenship
Act
and are inappropriate as they invite comparison, and confusion, with these words as they are used and have been interpreted in other statutory instruments. I much prefer the words 'personal interests' used by the Attorney General in his written and oral submissions.)
"58. The Minister, of course, is wrong, to the extent that submissions were eventually made in that regard. It is true that the additional submissions were attached to the Report and that one must generally assume that a decision-maker has examined all the evidence and documentation. But where the personal interests considerations are so overwhelmingly favourable to the person concerned as they are here -- fifty years of irreproachable life in Canada -- one should expect the decision-maker to at least formally recognize the existence of those interests. It is apparent at the face of the record that there was no balancing of the personal interests of Mr. Oberlander and of the public interest. The decision in that regard is patently unreasonable.
"
The War Crimes Program
"59. The Minister's Report does refer to the 'no safe haven' policy but does not analyse why it is that Mr. Oberlander fits within the policy which, the Report fails to mention, applies
only
to suspected war criminals. In face of the express finding by Mr. Justice MacKay that no evidence was presented about any personal involvement of Mr. Oberlander in war crimes, one would expect the Governor in Council to at least explain why, in its view, a policy which, by its very -- and underlined -- words applied
only
to suspected war criminals, applied to someone who served only as an interpreter in the German army. I note that neither the Minister in her report nor the reviewing Judge even refer to the fact that Mr. Oberlander had asserted that he had not joined the German army voluntarily and that Mr. Justice MacKay has not made a definite finding as to whether Mr. Oberlander had been conscripted or not. (Underline in the original)
"60. The Governor in Council could not reasonably come to the conclusion that the policy applied to Mr. Oberlander without first forming an opinion as to whether there was evidence permitting a finding (not made by the Reference Judge) that Mr. Oberlander could be suspected of being complicit in the activities of an organization with a single, brutal purpose. The reviewing Judge took upon himself to decide what the Governor in Council had omitted to examine and decide, that EK 10a was an organization with a single, brutal purpose and that Mr. Oberlander was complicit in the organization's activities. The decision of the Governor in Council in that regard cannot be supplemented by that of the reviewing Judge. The decision of the Governor in Council is not reasonable as it fails to make the appropriate findings and relate them to the person whose citizenship was at issue.
"
Conclusion
"61. I would allow the appeal with costs here and below, set aside the decision of the Federal Court, allow the application for judicial review, set aside the decision of the Governor in Council and remit the matter back to the Governor in Council for a new determination. In practice, this Order means that the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, should she decide to again seek the revocation of the citizenship of Mr. Oberlander, is expected to present the Governor in Council with a new Report which will address the concerns expressed by the Court in these reasons."