 [26] 
  Mr. Toora's failure to request the protection of the U.S. authorities during his seven-year stay in the United States is certainly a fundamental factor to consider in assessing the credibility of his subjective fear, as Mr. Justice Martineau held in  
 Ayub v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2004] F.T.R. Uned. 805; [2004] F.C.J. No. 1707; 2004 FC 1411, at paragraphs 14-15: 
 
 
 
 "In the case at bar, the tribunal was well founded to take into account the fact that the applicant's refugee claim was made after an unusually long delay of nearly five years after she first came to Canada. In connection with this, the tribunal found that the applicant failed to provide satisfactory explanations for the delay. This Court has already established that such a delay and lack of satisfactory explanation can be fatal to an applicant's claim. Mr. Justice Rouleau held in  
 Espinosa v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2003] F.C.J. No. 1680 (F.C.T.D.) (QL) that: 
 
 
 
 'The Board states correctly that while the delay is generally not a determinative factor in a refugee claim, there are circumstances where the delay can be such that it assumes a decisive role; what is fatal to the applicant's claim is his inability to provide any satisfactory explanation for the delay.' 
 
 
 
 "Furthermore, the tribunal also took into account the fact that the applicant did not make a refugee claim while she was in the United States. However, she did stay in the United States for almost five years. This is yet another element that the tribunal considered in its assessment of the applicant's credibility in her allegation of subjective fear. According to Mr. Justice Pinard in  
 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Bueno 
 , [2004] F.C.J. No. 629 (F.C.T.D.) (QL) held that: 
 
 
 
 'In fact, the failure to claim refugee status when the claimant is in a country of protection, is an element which goes to the root of the claim and which should be considered in the assessment of the credibility of the claimant's subjective fear.'" 
 
 
 
 (See also:  
 Tofan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2001] F.T.R. Uned. 633; [2001] F.C.J. No. 1379; 2001 FCT 1011.)