[60]
The evidence establishes that:
"The first set of unlicensed copies are those referred to in the evidence of Andrew Younger. The Original Younger Affidavit states that unlicensed copies of the Microsoft programs Windows 95, Office 95, and Access 97 were loaded on two computers supplied by McArthur Thompson. This evidence is corroborated by one of the McArthur Thompson's witnesses, Jason McGrath, who agreed that disks containing those programs were taken from one of the other defendants, KLJ, and the programs were copied onto the McArthur Thompson computers.
"The retail value of a license for one unlicensed copy of Windows 95 and licenses for two unlicensed copies of Access 97 is $1,206. Licenses for two copies of the component parts that make up Office 95 would be in addition to this amount.
"The second category of unlicensed software is software located on five Macintosh computers in the Art Department at McArthur Thompson. McArthur Thompson's own evidence is that McArthur Thompson had two copies of Adobe Systems Illustrator 6.0 and three copies of Adobe Systems Type Manager Deluxe 4.0. McArthur Thompson also admits that it had one copy of Pagemaker and three copies of Streamline. McArthur Thompson made regular use of at least the Adobe Systems Illustrator program.
"McArthur Thompson concedes that it did not have licences for at least some of the Adobe programs installed in the Art Department. In fact, McArthur Thompson has not produced in evidence licences for any of these programs. Licenses for two unlicensed copies of Adobe Illustrator 6.0, one unlicensed copy of Pagemaker, and three unlicensed copies of Streamline have a retail value of $2,682.
"The third category of unlicensed software is thirteen copies of Microsoft Office 97 which had been loaded on McArthur Thompson computers by January 7, 1998. McArthur Thompson concedes that the Office software was not licensed and that it subsequently had to buy licences for the Office software to legitimize those copies.
"These unlicensed copies were loaded on computers which were part of a new network system McArthur Thompson had recently acquired. The initial quotation to McArthur Thompson was for the acquisition of twenty computers and the installation of twenty licensed copies of Office 97, one on each computer. McArthur Thompson rejected that quotation, and subsequently placed an order for only fifteen computers, with licenses for just two copies of the Office 97 software. Notwithstanding that it had ordered licenses for only two copies of the software, copies of Office 97 were loaded on all fifteen McArthur Thompson machines, resulting in thirteen unlicensed copies.
"Office 97 is a 'suite' of software which includes, as component parts, other computer programs. Among the component parts of Office 97 are: Access 8.0, Outlook 8.0, Powerpoint 8.0 and Word 8.0. The total retail value of licenses for all of these components, if purchased individually, is $ 1,526, and therefore the retail value of licenses for thirteen copies of these component parts of Office 97 is $19,838.
"The fourth category of unlicensed software is thirteen copies of Windows 95 Plus 4.40, a software utility. McArthur Thompson has acknowledged that these copies were on its machines, and there has been no license for the software utility produced by McArthur Thompson. The total retail value of thirteen unlicensed copies of Windows 95 Plus 4.40 is $3,757."