[62]
In her affidavit dated December 10, 1997, Anne Marie Murphy, employed by Microsoft as a corporate attorney in Redmond, Washington State, U.S.A. attested to the following concerning injury to the plaintiff Microsoft:
"Windows 95, Windows NT 4.0, Office and the Office applications (computer programs), Access, Excel, PowerPoint and Word are valuable assets belonging to Microsoft. Microsoft has invested tens of millions of dollars in the development, promotion and distribution of these programs. In the case of Windows 95 and previous versions of Windows, over 40 million copies have been lawfully distributed world-wide.
"Unauthorized duplication and use of Microsoft computer programs causes very serious damage and irreparable harm to Microsoft. BSA and CAAST have estimated that a piracy rate of approximately 42% exists in Canada in the case of computer application software, meaning that approximately 42% of all copies of computer application software have been made without authorization. This scale of theft of computer programs, whether Microsoft's or any other software developer's, deters investment in new products and technology, contributes to higher prices, and hurts consumers. Piracy of the sort engaged in by the defendants, known as 'softlifting', is the most prevalent form of piracy world-wide and in Canada and, as such, is particularly threatening and harmful to copyright owners.
"Apart from the direct loss of revenue caused by the defendants to Microsoft, continued softlifting by businesses such as KLJ, McArthur Thompson and One 2 One also causes damage by its example. Businesses such as those of the defendants' have the appearance of legitimacy to the public at large and their continued activities lead to others engaging in similar activities because of the apparent acceptability of copyright infringement. The cumulative effect of many businesses and individuals engaging in copyright infringement profoundly augments the damage caused by the defendants directly."