[8]
As a matter of law, it must be borne in mind that we are not dealing with a statute establishing legal rights here, but rather with a policy designed to give special consideration to illegal migrants in Canada. The purpose of the policy is to encourage such people to come forward and to have their circumstances verified by a Review Committee in the hope that recommendations can be made to the Minister to exempt them from the usual requirement of having to leave the country before applying for landed immigrant status. The only kind of decision that can be made by the Review Committee is a discretionary one in favour of the applicant. In considering the Minister's obligations for procedural or administrative fairness in the exercise of that discretion, Strayer, J., states in Williams v. Minister of Employment and Immigration, [1985] 2 F.C. 153:
"The procedure she now wishes to invoke is a purely discretionary one in the hope that she might be granted a Minister's permit to stay. This is not a benefit to which she is legally entitled nor is there any denial of vested rights involved. In such circumstances any requirement of fairness in the exercise of the Minister's discretion must be minimal indeed: see Kellawan v. Ministry of Employment and Immigration, judgment dated December 7, 1983, Federal Court, Trial Division, T-2619-83, not reported. Nor has any specific denial of fairness been established. The application was not referred to the committee because the applicant did not come within the terms of either the old or the new programme and there is no dispute as to the correctness of that conclusion."
This kind of policy or programme, therefore, does not create a right which would entitle this applicant to relief by way of mandamus. It is clear, however, that the duty of fairness requires that this applicant receive the same consideration that is afforded to all other applicants under the same policy or programme. A failure to do so on the part of the respondent might be grounds for a review of their decision by way of certiorari. The programme required verification that Mr. Rai had been in Canada for five years without legal status and without apprehension. The Committee gave approval in principle so it could proceed with that verification. It reviewed the facts, as it was required by the policy to do, and concluded that the applicant was not in Canada during the necessary period of time because of his deportation. It might equally have concluded that apprehension alone, was sufficient to break the chain. I find no reason to conclude that in its consideration of the submissions put forward on behalf of this applicant, the Committee was in any way derelict in the duty of fairness or that it failed to consider all aspects of the applicant's situation.