[238]
The applicants in this case have submitted a number of questions for certification:
The proposed questions are as follows:
1. Does the implementation of paragraphs 19 and 23 of the Chairperson's Guideline 7 violate principles of natural justice by unduly interfering with the claimant's right to be heard?
2. Has the implementation of Guideline 7 led to the fettering of Board members' discretion?
3. Does Guideline 7 violate natural justice by distorting the independent role of Board members?
4. Does Guideline 7 violate the principles of fundamental justice under s. 7 of the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
?
5. Is Guideline 7 unlawful because it is ultra vires the guideline making authority of the Chairperson under the
IRPA
?
6. If Guideline 7 and the procedure mandated by it breaches natural or fundamental justice, can a refugee claimant in any way implicitly waive the breach, for example by failing to object to the procedure?
7. Is Guideline 7 ultra vires the
IRPA
and
Regulations
thereunder?
8. Does "reverse order questioning" constitute a denial of the principles of fundamental justice and denial of s. 7 of the
Charter
in:
a) Denying the right to effective and competent counsel?
b) Denying the right to be heard?
9. Does reverse order questioning as mandated by Guideline 7 constitute:
a) A breach of the right to an independent judiciary and constitute a reasonable apprehension of institutional bias contrary to the preamble of the
Constitution Act, 1867
?
b) A breach of the right to a hearing before a fair and independent tribunal and a reasonable apprehension of institutional bias contrary to s. 7 of the
Charter
?
10. With respect to Guideline 7 and the objection/non-objection of the claimant's counsel at the refugee hearing:
a) Does the respondent confuse the doctrine of waiver with that of the failure to object before the trier of fact as constituting an issue estoppel on judicial review?
b) If no such confusion exists, then what "right" is being purportedly waived by the claimant at the hearing by not registering an objection to Guideline 7?
c) As a matter of fundamental justice, is the exercise of a Board member's purported discretion pursuant to any Guideline ever in the claimant's hands to "waive"?