[35]
The thrust of the applicant's arguments appear from paragraphs 29 to 33 of his memorandum of fact and of law which read as follows:
"29. We respectfully submit that while paragraph 13 of CFAO 15-7 carefully and methodically identifies the total obligatory period of service as being the sum of the first and the second period, and further refers to the periods being served consecutively, there is no reference whatsoever to the ORDER in which the periods must be served. Specifically, there is no restriction preventing the postgraduate period from being served prior to the undergraduate period. In this regard, we respectfully submit that Lieutenant General Fischer was incorrect in reading in a term with respect to the order in which the periods of obligatory service must be served, when all that is required is that the periods be served consecutively.
"30. It is our respectful submission that as of June 13, 1996 Couture would have occupied a postgraduate position at the Aerospace Test Establishment for 50 months, and that in consideration of the purpose of the Canadian Forces Administration Order 15-7, namely that officers who receive education must provide an equitable return of service, this time should be recognized as the equitable return of service for his postgraduate training. The remaining obligatory service, as it was incurred through undergraduate training, should qualify for waiver pursuant to the FRP 96.
"31. Further, Lieutenant General Fischer's conduct indicates that he took into account irrelevant considerations; specifically, that Couture obtained a Master's degree in addition to an undergraduate degree and that this fact alone precludes his ability to have his undergraduate obligatory service waived.
"32. Further, Lieutenant General Fischer failed to take into account relevant considerations; specifically, that Couture had served, as of November, 1996, 65 months of obligatory service, the last 55 of which were served in a position requiring a Master's degree.
"33. With reference to the CFAO 15-7, it should be recognized that the purpose of obligatory service is to provide an equitable return of service. If Couture had completed his undergraduate training and had served only one month of obligatory service, he would undoubtedly be eligible for the FRP 96. In fact, Couture had, as of November, 1996, served 65 months, and has been advised that he is ineligible because the Canadian Forces will only apply the 65 months to his undergraduate training and not his postgraduate training. This approach, in our respectful submission, is not equitable."