[2]
The court is bound to state that by their respective solicitors' consent, the parties (other than the Minister) have inflicted on the court, on themselves and on all others except those very solicitors a so-called "confidentiality order", document #29. The filed copy of the letter (and its enclosure) dated March 8, 1994, from Ridout & Maybee to the administrator with copies respectively to the applicants' and the Minister's solicitors indicates approval as to form of that confidentiality order dated February 14, 1994, but signed by the Associate Senior Prothonotary, in fact, on March 31, 1994. There is an element of public law in these proceedings as suggested in the last paragraph of Mr. Justice Pinard's reasons, document #25, given herein on February 16, 1994. An order of this sort goes against the inherent nature and constitutional imperatives of this court. It is an affront which is to be suffered by the court only in instances of dire, demonstrated need, if ever at all. In this case, one wonders what is so preciously secret about the facts of this run-of-the-mill proceeding. The patents in question, as do all patents, put the processes of the making, constructing, using and/or selling of the drug nizatidine by the applicants, and therefore by the compulsory licensee, Novopharm, squarely in the public domain. If others who may be touched by these proceedings have not bothered to obtain, or at least to seek, patent protection that is surely their concern: but why should they cause this court to go perversely against its nature by hiding filed materials on their behalf? A heavy onus naturally does, and in practice always should, rest on those who seek a confidentiality order, whether by consent or not, for the proceedings are not entirely in the domain of purely private law. Even if they were, such orders always go against the constitutional imperative of an open court, including public access to the court's record, and against the court's very nature as a superior court of record as provided in s. 3 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, and amendments thereto. Even if the parties do consent, the court should jealously guard against all but the most demonstratively necessitous affront to its very nature. Such secrecy order should never go just for the asking.