[21]
On August 18, 2003, the applicant received a memorandum telling him that he should take appropriate steps to remove the TV tuner card from his computer at his own expense in accordance with Directive 090 (Appendix A). On August 21, 2003, the applicant asked the Deputy Commissioner, Pacific Region, to grant him an exemption so he could keep his TV tuner card and purchase a wide screen television. On September 12, 2003, the applicant received a negative reply. However, during the same month the deputy head verbally agreed to an extension of the deadline being granted to the applicant. At the same time, the applicant received a stay in the implementation of the decision to remove the disputed peripheral equipment from his computer. In any event, on September 23, 2003, the applicant notified the Service head office that he was not objecting to removal of his TV tuner card from his personal computer, but refused to give up his LS120 storage unit. Despite the offer initially made by the applicant (who in fact later objected to the legality of removal of the two disputed peripheral devices and brought these legal proceedings), for several months the penitentiary authorities took no action. The prolonged inaction of the Service constituted a tacit acceptance of the argument that the applicant had acquired rights. Further, the lack of any specific action by the Service regarding the disputed peripheral equipment suggests that its continued use after July 2003 did not pose any reasonable risk. Moreover, the respondents filed no evidence to suggest that the possession of the disputed peripheral equipment by the applicant posed any risk whatever. Further, all general documentation relating to risk factors considered by the Commissioner, if any, in prohibiting or limiting the possession of computers and certain peripheral equipment (subject to acquired rights and exceptions currently contained in Appendix A of Directive 090), is currently unavailable and was excluded from the record prepared by the Court under Rules 317 and 318.