 [11] 
  The Board made a number of specific findings that, even in the absence of any analysis of the general political atmosphere in Bulgaria, would support the finding that there was no objective fear of persecution since there was nothing to show that the applicant had been persecuted in the past and therefore no well-founded fear of persecution if they were to be returned to Bulgaria. These specific findings were as follows: 
 
 
 
 1. The police searches of the applicants' home from 1981 until the time she fled Bulgaria, although harassment, did not amount to persecution. 
 
 
 
 2. During the 1980's the applicant led a fairly normal life, apart from the police searches, and was able to continue working in her medical profession. 
 
 
 
 3. The alleged police harassment relating to the husband took place after the change in government and therefore it looks like it was more private than political in the Convention sense -- (i.e., no State complicity) 
 
 
 
 4. The police attempts to get her to entice her husband to come back and the threats that something might happen to her to force him to come back, although "abhorrent", did not amount to persecution. 
 
 
 
 5. The persons who attacked the applicant and her son could not be proven to be police officers. The applicant's claim that the attackers were police officers, because of their haircuts and because one neighbour thought she recognized a person in uniform she had seen days before as the same man who attacked the applicant, were not sufficient enough to establish them as police officers. Further, if the police really wanted to set up an accident they would have done it in a much more effective manner rather than attacking the applicant in full site of her neighbours. 
 
 
 
 6. The fact that she was transferred to another hospital, participated in a strike and was watched by a "hawkish" supervisor does not bring the claimant within the scope of the Convention. 
 
 
 
 7. Since the applicant was allowed to get an exit visa it was difficult to see that she was the target of persecution by the State. It was especially difficult if the State had been trying to ascertain, as the applicant had testified earlier, whether or not that she was going to leave the country. 
