[207]
In
Augier
, supra, Justice Mosley followed the Supreme Court decision in
Benner
. At paragraphs 16-18, he wrote:
"The
Benner
decision establishes that the alleged
Charter
violation in the present case is not barred due to retroactivity or lack of standing. On both of these issues, the situation before me is akin to that of
Benner
. In
Benner
, supra, the Supreme Court noted that the 1977 amendments to the citizenship legislation allowed children to claim citizenship from either or both parents, regardless of the parents' marital status. Such change in the law, however, applies only to children born after February 14, 1977.
"Previously, children born of Canadian mothers in wedlock could not derive citizenship from their mother, unless she was unwed at the time of the child's birth. Therefore, paragraph 5(2)(b) was added in 1977, and remains in the current
Act
. This permitted children born of married Canadian mothers, who previously were denied through subparagraph 5(1)(b)(i) of the
1970 Act
, to apply for citizenship that would be granted upon the person swearing an oath of allegiance and passing a criminal and security clearance. However, children born in wedlock of Canadian fathers did not have to swear such an oath or undergo background checks, and were recognized as citizens upon registration of their birth. The Supreme Court of Canada found that this distinction violated section 15 of the
Charter
and was not saved by section 1.
"The applicant's situation, however, is not directly analogous to the one faced by the Court in
Benner
, supra, as here, the alleged discrimination rises from a possible stereotypical application or view of children born out of wedlock and that as a result of such status, individuals born to unwed, non-citizen mothers are prohibited by the legislation from claiming Canadian citizenship through their Canadian fathers. If the Canadian father and non-Canadian mother were married at the time of the individual's birth, prior to February 15, 1977, then such an individual could have claimed citizenship through his father. Marital status of the individual's parents is therefore a key, differential factor in this case, rather than merely the gender of the Canadian parent."