[228]
The reasons for judgment were given by Justice Sexton who wrote at paragraphs 15, 21-25:
"It is surprising, at the very least, that Jacob (the father) was given no formal notice that he was no longer considered a Canadian citizen. Counsel for the respondent indicated to the court that it was standard practice for the respondent not to formally notify persons of the loss of their citizenship, but rather to wait until such persons either requested a certificate of citizenship or the issuance of a passport before informing them.
. . . . .
"Both Jacob (David's son) and the appellants (David's grandchildren) relied on David's status as a Canadian citizen for their claim to citizenship. Thus, it is necessary in both of those proceedings to establish whether David was a Canadian citizen at the relevant time. Indeed, in the case before this court, the applications judge determined that David was never entitled to become a Canadian citizen.
"Thus, David (the grandfather) is in the position of having the courts deliberate upon and decide whether he ever became a Canadian citizen, in spite of his having been issued a certificate of Canadian citizenship approximately 40 years ago and in spite of his never having been notified by the respondent that he is no longer considered a citizen.
"I find this an intolerable situation. Procedural fairness demands that David (the grandfather) be given a chance to appear and make representations as to his right to Canadian citizenship.
"I also have considered that the present state of the two sets of proceedings would permit this court to dismiss the present appeal on the basis that Jacob (the father) was no longer a citizen and therefore the appellants could not become citizens. At some later time, the Federal Court, on the evidence before it, could conceivably conclude that Jacob (the father) had not lost his Canadian citizenship, thus producing inconsistent verdicts. This is a most unsatisfactory state.
"Consequently, the appeal should be allowed, the decision of the applications judge set aside and the matter remitted to the Federal Court for redetermination."