[11]
The consideration of the appropriate standard of review also requires an under­standing of the conflicting jurisprudence of the Federal Court - Trial Division over the past two decades when Citizenship appeals proceeded by way of trial de novo. Some judges of this court have adopted the view that the residency requirement in paragraph 5(1)(c) of the
Act
entails more than a mere counting of days. This view was first enunciated in
Papadogiorgakis, Re
[see footnote 7] by Thurlow, A.C.J., as he then was, when he stated:
"It seems to me that the words 'residence' and 'resident' in paragraph 5(1)(b) of the new
Citizenship Act
are not as strictly limited to actual presence in Canada throughout the period as they were in the former statute but can include, as well, situations in which the person concerned has a place in Canada which is used by him during the period as a place of abode to a sufficient extent to demonstrate the reality of his residing there during the material period even though he is away from it part of the time.
. . . . .
"A person with an established home of his own in which he lives does not cease to be resident there when he leaves it for a temporary purpose whether on business or vacation or even to pursue a course of study. The fact of his family remaining there while he is away may lend support for the conclusion that he has not ceased to reside there. The conclusion may be reached, as well, even though the absence may be more or less lengthy. It is also enhanced if he returns there frequently when the opportunity to do so arises. It is, as Rand, J., appears to me to be saying in the passage I have read, 'chiefly a matter of the degree to which a person in mind and fact settles into or maintains or centralizes his ordinary mode of living with its accessories in social relations, interests and conveniences at or in the place in question'." [see footnote 8]
The principle in
Papadogiorgakis
was succinctly stated by Dubé, J., in
Banerjee,
Re
[see footnote 9]: "It is the quality of the attachment to Canada that is to be ascer­tained." Justice Dubé has more recently reiterated his view in
Ho, Re
: [see footnote 10]
"As I have stated on many occasions, residency in Canada for the purposes of citizenship does not imply full-time physical presence. The place of residence of a person is not where that person works but where he or she returns to after work. Hence, an applicant for citizenship who has clearly and definitively established a home in Canada with the transparent inten­tion of maintaining permanent roots in this country ought not to be deprived of citizenship merely because he has to earn his livelihood and that of his family by doing business offshore.
The most eloquent indicia of residency is the permanent establishment of a person and his family in the country.
" (see footnote 11] (Emphasis added.)