[8]
An e-mail exchange between Dr. Frazee's union representative, Maureen Harper, and Dr. Chew illustrates the rancorous tone of the dispute and Dr. Frazee's increasing level of frustration with his work status:
"Hello Ken. I am writing because I have some very grave concerns about what is happening at the abattoir where Scott has been working for a number of years. I understand that plant management has expressed consternation about their recent rates of condemnation. I believe that CFIA has a responsibility to investigate the plant's concerns. This should be done by a national correlation team as is done with similar complaints in poultry plants.
What is concerning me is how Scott is being treated. I believe by removing Scott from his duties, you are not only sending the wrong message to industry (the tale of the dock wagging the dog), but you are also unjustly treating one of your employees. What ever happened to being innocent until proven guilty? I am even more concerned to learn that you feel Scott is not entitled to union representation in this matter. You and plant management have tried to have him removed from performing his duties at the abattoir and you think that he is not entitled to be represented by the union?
This is becoming an all too frequent occurrence in this Agency. Plant management makes a complaint to CFIA if they perceive a vet is too stringent in performing his duties which causes an economic loss to the plant and CFIA pulls the vet from the job to keep the industry happy. And we dare call ourselves a regulatory Agency! This issue is scheduled to be discussed at the national UMC on June 16. I will personally be addressing it. I am tired of continually hearing about veterinarians in abattoirs being subjected to harassment not only from plant management, but also CFIA. This all has to stop because quite frankly, the CFIA does not have any vets to spare when they keep removing them from the abattoirs.
I would suggest that you really need to be careful how you handle the situation.
. . . . .
Hi Maureen, I appreciate and value the comments you raised. I am not sure if you have been presented with all the facts though. I personally find it very difficult when faced with some facts and some strong assumptions already made.
I have asked Dr. Frazee temporarily to stay away from the kill floor and he has cooperated by doing so. Both my Regional Director and myself have indicated that this is not a punitive measure. We have made no assessment of blame or acknowledgment that any fault has been made.
Maureen, when you have separate Pork Marketing Boards from two different provinces and various swine producers as well as the management of the abattoir all suddenly demanding the removal of the veterinarian, there is a very urgent need to diffuse the situation and be able to talk and listen to them. Yesterday I spent pretty well most of the day at Larsen Packers, Est. 150 with 13 angry swine producers from New Brunswick, the chairman of the New Brunswick Pork Marketing Board and their veterinary swine consultant.
I explained to them our action plan. Further, that we are presently arranging for a veterinary pathologist and a national veterinary correlator, experienced in swine condemnation to be on-site to spend time with our veterinarians. I also informed the group that I shall be bringing Dr. Frazee back on the kill floor to spend time with the pathologist and correlator. A couple of the producers, including a major one suggested that if Dr. Frazee was found lacking in some areas, that he be send for further retraining. I think you can see in which direction we are heading. There are a lot of issues to separate out, a big one being miscommunication.
Maureen I am sorry I cannot give you details but if you feel you need to talk to me, give me a shout."