 [18] 
  This principle was most recently reaffirmed by Simpson J. in  
 Cejudo Lopez v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2007 FC 1341 at paragraph 24, released December 21, 2007: 
 
 
 
 [24] Moreover,  
 the Board failed to address contradictory evidence that was critical to the reasonableness of the applicant's failure to seek state protection 
 . In  
 Simpson v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2006 FC 970, [2006] F.C.J. No. 1224 (QL), at para. 44, Russell J. asserted that: 
 
 
 
 While it is true that there is a presumption that the Board considered all the evidence, and there is no need to mention all the documentary evidence that was before it, where there is important material evidence on the record that contradicts the factual finding of the Board, [it] must provide reasons why the contradictory evidence was not considered relevant or trustworthy [...] 
 
 
 
 Thus, a Court may infer that an erroneous finding of fact was made from a failure of an administrative board to "mention in its reasons some evidence before it that was relevant to the finding, and pointed to a different conclusion from that reached by the agency."  
 (Cepeda-Gutierrez v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [1998] F.C.J. No. 1425 (QL), at para. 15). 
 
 
 
 [25] As Layden-Stevenson J. indicated in  
 Castillo v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2004 FC 56, [2004] F.C.J. No. 43 (QL), at para. 9: 
 
 
 
 The question of effective state protection was identified as the central issue. Where evidence that relates to a central issue is submitted, the burden of explanation increases for the board when it assigns little or no weight to that evidence or when it prefers specific documentary evidence over other documentary evidence. 
 
 
 
 Thus,  
 in the context of the central issue of state protection, the Board is required to explain its preference for certain documentary evidence over other relevant sources. 
 
 
 
 [Emphasis added]