[1]
Morneau, Prothonotary
[Translation]: This is a motion by the defendant under s. 415(3) of the
Fedearl Court Rules
for an order directing the plaintiff to provide further and better particulars of certain paragraphs in its statement of claim.
[2]
On or about February 20, 1997, counsel for the plaintiff sent counsel for the defendant a partial response to the request for particulars sent by counsel for the defendant in June 1996. The particulars to which the plaintiff did not respond are set out in the text of the instant motion. The partial response given by the plaintiff is reproduced in Exhibit P-1 to the affidavit filed by the defendant in support of the motion (the plaintiff's response).
Context
[3]
In its statement of claim, the plaintiff alleges that since May 1976 it or its predecessors in title have been using the expressions "Restaurant Valentine" and "Valentine" in connection with the operation of a restaurant, either, it must be understood, as a trade name or as a trademark, or possibly for both purposes.
[4]
It contends that the defendant, which operates in the same field as it does, has used the same expressions, in part, to connect the defendant's business to its own in the minds of consumers. On this point, it is seeking, among other remedies, to have the trademarks that the defendant has had registered stricken, and to have an injunction issue to put an end to any confusion between its business operations and the defendant's.
The Law In Respect
Of Particulars
[5]
Before making an order in respect of particulars, the court must evaluate whether a party has enough information to be able to understand the other party's position and to prepare a responsive answer, be it a defence or a reply. (See
Astra Aktiebolag et al. v. Inflazyme Pharmaceuticals Inc.
(1995), 96 F.T.R. 122; 61 C.P.R.(3d) 178 (T.D. Protho.), at p. 184.)
[6]
In
Embee Electronic Agencies Ltd. v. Agence Sherwood Agencies Ltd. et al.
(1979), 43 C.P.R.(2d) 285 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 287, Marceau, J., stated the extent to which the defendant is entitled to be furnished with particulars of the plaintiff's case at the pleading stage:
"At that early stage, a defendant is entitled to be furnished all particulars which will enable him to better understand the position of the plaintiff, see the basis of the case made against him and appreciate the facts on which it is founded
so that he may reply intelligently to the statement of claim
and state properly the grounds of defence on which he himself relies, but he is not entitled to go any further and require more than that." (My emphasis)
[7]
In paragraph 2 of its notice of motion, the defendant states that the allegations in the statement of claim [Translation] "... are such as to prevent the defendant from knowing precisely the facts on which the plaintiff's claim is based". It must be recalled, with respect to that allegation, that the purpose of a motion for particulars is not the same as an examination for discovery of the other party, and that the purpose of such a motion, as stated in
Embee
, supra, is not necessarily to enable the defendant to know all the facts on which the action is based. In
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED [see footnote 1]
Analysis
[8]
With respect to the particulars sought concerning paragraph 1 of the plaintiff's statement of claim (the claim), counsel for the plaintiff undertook at the hearing to supply the defendant with the particulars it is seeking. Accordingly, there is no need to rule on this request, other than to take notice of that undertaking.
[9]
With respect to paragraph 3 of the claim, the defendant's request for particulars is worded as follows:
[Translation] "The defendant is entitled to obtain particulars of paragraph 3 of the plaintiff's claim, to wit, who the plaintiff's predecessors in title are and how and on what precise date the predecessors in title adopted and used the trademark Valentine and the trade name Restaurant Valentine; paragraph 3 reads as follows:
'The plaintiff or its predecessors in title have adopted and used the trademark and trade name "Restaurant Valentine" and "Valentine" in association with a restaurant business located at 4794 St-Charles Boulevard, in the town of Pierrefonds, Province of Quebec, since at least as early as May 1976; ...'"
[10]
At the hearing, counsel for the plaintiff undertook to inform the defendant of who the plaintiff's predecessors in title are and of the periods of their respective uses. There will therefore be no ruling on this point other than to take notice of this undertaking.
[11]
It is to be hoped that this exercise will enable both parties to better understand who has used this expression and in what capacity. While this is not precisely a request by the defendant for particulars, it arose during the hearing of the instant motion as an aspect that was an indirect source of some confusion between counsel for the parties.
[12]
With respect to the precise circumstances of the predecessors' use, it does not appear to me that these details are required by the defendant for the purposes of replying intelligently at this stage to paragraph 7 of the statement of claim (on this point, see the comments of Marceau, J., in
Embee
, supra, at pp. 286-287).
[13]
With respect to paragraph 4 of the claim, the defendant's request for particulars is worded as follows:
[Translation] "The defendant is entitled to obtain particulars of paragraph 4 of the claim, to wit, in what manner the trademark Valentine and the trade name Restaurant Valentine have been prominently featured at the plaintiff's restaurant, stating the dates, circumstances and various methods used, and what advertising the plaintiff is referring to, stating the publication dates and the places where that advertising was circulated and the name of all the media used by the plaintiff; paragraph 4 reads as follows:
'Said trademark and trade name have been prominently featured since 1977 at the plaintiff's restaurant and in plaintiff's advertising in association with its restaurant business in Quebec, whereby the public in Quebec has come to recognize said trademark and trade name as denoting the plaintiff's business;'"
[14]
The particulars sought will be denied in the instant motion. As I pointed out in another decision [see footnote 2]:
[Translation] "It must also be recognized that seeking information as to promotion and advertising of the trademark in issue in all time periods is not one of the areas recognized in the case law as requiring a degree of particulars greater than what has been offered to date by the plaintiff (see
International Business Machines Corp. v. Printech Ribbons Inc.
(1994), 55 C.P.R.(3d) 337 (hereinafter '
IBM
') and
Figgie International Inc. v. Schoettler
(1994), 53 C.P.R.(3d) 450)."
[15]
Lastly, the defendant is seeking particulars as to paragraphs 10 and 15 of the claim. I intend to deal with these two requests together, since the point of confusion to which they refer is common to both, and that aspect, apart from certain facts which must be known, is still an issue that the court will ultimately have to decide when the argument is completed.
[16]
The defendant's motion in respect of paragraphs 10 and 15 of the claim reads as follows:
[Translation] "The defendant is entitled to obtain particulars of paragraph 10 of the claim, to wit, the manner in which the defendant's trademarks create or are likely to create confusion with the plaintiff's trademark and trade name; paragraph 10 reads as follows:
'The adoption and use of the two registered trademarks of the defendant, TMA 329,920 and TMA 356,457, creates or is likely to create confusion with the trademark and trade name of the plaintiff: "Restaurant Valentine";'
"With respect to paragraph 15 of the claim, the defendant is entitled to obtain the following particulars, to wit, the dates and the names of the persons involved in each of the events referred to when, according to the plaintiff, there was confusion with the defendant's trademarks; paragraph 15 reads as follows:
'In fact, plaintiff has already been subject to several instances of confusion brought about by the adoption and use of the above-mentioned registered trademarks by defendant;'"
[17]
In its response, the plaintiff has already provided the defendant with considerable particulars concerning the nature of the various incidents that, according to the plaintiff, created confusion. Nonetheless, the plaintiff's answer is vague as to the time when each incident identified occurred, and as to the approximate number of times when each incident occurred. Counsel for the plaintiff has come around to the idea that these particulars are needed by the defendant for the purposes of its defence, and has therefore undertaken to supply those particulars. The court takes notice of that undertaking.
[18]
It does not seem to me that any other particulars concerning any confusion are required for the purposes of the defendant's response.
[19]
Moreover, in the circumstances, the paragraphs for which particulars will be provided should not be struck out, and the court trusts that there will be compliance with the undertakings given in court.
[20]
Costs of this motion will be in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
Footnotes
1.
Embee Electronic Agencies v. Agence Sherwood Agencies Inc.
(1979), 43 C.P.R.(2d) 285 (F.C.T.D.).
2.
C.T.C. Canada Inc. v. Paul
(1996), 119 F.T.R. 46 (T.D. Protho.).
