 [35] 
  Sgt. Haanstra of the R.C.M.P. also filed an affidavit in support of the Minister's motion for summary judgment. In it, he swears that he was the lead investigator into the criminal charges that led to the defendant's criminal conviction. Sgt. Haanstra swears that: 
 
 
 
 "5. On November 6, 1992 RCMP Cst. Pattyson and I first contacted the defendant. We met with him and conducted a short interview regarding the allegations made by C.F. The defendant asked to speak to his lawyer and the interview concluded. The defendant knew or ought to have known that as of November 6, 1992 he was the subject of a criminal investigation. 
 
 
 
 "6. On the afternoon of November 6, 1992 I am advised and believe that then counsel for the defendant, Brad Hunter, contacted Cst. Pattyson and arranged to interview the defendant on November 9, 1992. I attended the interview with the defendant and Mr. Hunter. The defendant gave a written statement denying his involvement. When that was done, I asked the defendant if he was prepared to provide blood and hair samples. Mr. Hunter advised that they would respond to that request at a later date. 
 
 
 
 "7. On November 11, 1992 I am advised and believe that Mr. Hunter contacted Cst. Pattyson. Mr. Hunter said that if the defendant agreed to provide a blood sample, he and the defendant would want to be given some of the semen sample obtained from C.F. in order to conduct their own DNA test using independent experts. 
 
 
 
 "8. On November 16, 1992, I am advised and believe that Mr. Hunter telephoned Cst. Bevans, another Kipling Detachment RCMP member. Mr. Hunter said that the defendant was conditionally prepared to provide a blood sample that day. 
 
 
 
 "9. I had concluded after my interview with the defendant on November 9, 1992 that there were reasonable and probable grounds with which to charge the defendant for sexual assault pursuant to section 271 of the  
 Criminal Code 
 . On December 21, 1992 I contacted Steve Connelly, Regional Crown counsel in Regina, to see if he had any objections about my doing so. He said that he had already told the defendant's counsel that no charges would be laid until after DNA test results by an independent laboratory had been received. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "11. I am advised and believe that on November 17, 1992 some of the defendant's false blood sample, along with some of the semen sample taken from C.F., was forwarded to the RCMP Crime lab in Regina for DNA analysis. I am further advised and believe that on December 16, 1992 the Crime lab in Regina forwarded some of both samples to an independent lab in Greensboro, North Carolina as the defendant's then counsel had requested. 
 
 
 
 "12. On January 18, 1993 the defendant's then counsel received a forensic case report of the DNA test dated January 15, 1993 from the independent lab. On January 25, 1993 we received a copy [of] the same report at the Kipling Detachment. It showed that the false blood sample taken from the defendant on November 16, 1992 did not match the DNA sample of semen taken from C.F. Attached and marked as Exhibit 'C' to this affidavit is a copy of the forensic case test report. 
 
 
 
 "13. On June 15, 1993 the Kipling RCMP detachment also received confirmation from the RCMP crime lab in Ottawa that there was no DNA match from the false blood sample the defendant gave on November 16, 1992." 
 
