[8]
In view of the particular circumstances of this case, I feel it would be contrary to the administration of justice to refuse to hear the application for judicial review at bar or to dismiss it on the ground that the applicant did not exhaust the internal remedies available to him. In the case at bar, concurrently with the institution of these proceedings, the applicant in fact asked the Court to first grant him leave to file and serve the application for judicial review at bar beyond the usual 30-day deadline mentioned in subsection 18.1(2) of the
Federal Courts
Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7. In this connection, I note that the applicant briefly referred to the issue of exhausting internal remedies in the written arguments in support of his application for leave. Although in their written argument the respondents suggested several grounds for dismissing the applicant's application for an extension of time, those respondents did not expressly raise the issue of exhausting internal remedies. On the contrary, the respondents by implication admitted in their written arguments that filing a grievance at the second and third levels would serve no useful purpose here. The respondents argued that the computer had already been returned to the applicant on June 10, 2004, without the TV tuner. Thus, in the respondents' submission, in the circumstances the legality of the decision by the officers of the Service or the Commissioner to remove the TV tuners did not have to be decided. In short, it was submitted at the time that the questions raised by the applicant had become moot and that a decision by the Court would have no practical effect on the rights of the parties. Objecting instead to the applicant's failure to file an application for judicial review at the time he learned of the new policy prohibiting the use of TV tuners and other pieces of computer equipment, in July 2003, the respondents accordingly argued that the applicant's application raised no serious question requiring a decision by the Court.