[23]
On May 7, 2004, the applicant wrote the Institutional Head to repeat his objection to removing the storage unit from his computer. In the same letter, he agreed to remove his TV tuner card. On May 10, 2004, the applicant wrote Diane Mousouliotis, deputy Institutional Head, to suggest a date on which his computer could be sent to the supplier to have its TV tuner card removed. He still objected to removal of the storage unit. On May 14, 2004 the deputy Institutional Head notified the applicant that his storage unit would be removed from the computer. On May 16, 2004 the applicant once again wrote the Institutional Head asking to be allowed to retain his computer until July 15, 2004. After May 17, 2004, the applicant sent a number of letters to Mr. Kulik regarding certain technical problems relating to his computer. For example, the applicant sought permission to update Windows operation software on his computer because the new software available for visually handicapped persons required the XP version of Windows. Despite the favourable reply which he received from M. Kulik dated July 28, 2003, the applicant's application to update his operating system was denied by the penitentiary authorities on the ground that it was not a (Translation) "repair", which was authorized, but rather an (Translation) "updating", which was prohibited by Commissioner's Directive 090 (Appendix A). However, the Service authorized the applicant to obtain the secondary programs Dragon Naturally Speaking, Biblirom Larousse and Encarta so he could have access to his computer. In any case, the applicant also sent a number of letters regarding the LS120 unit and the obtaining of a larger monitor. The applicant received a negative response based on the fact that such a monitor required the use of a TV tuner card, equipment which since July 2003 had been prohibited by Commissioner's Directive 090 (Appendix A). The applicant subsequently made a second request regarding his operating system, this time to obtain the French version of Windows XP. To date, the applicant has received no reply. That said, it was not until May 31, 2004, that the Mission Institution authorities finally decided to confiscate the applicant's computer in order to remove the TV tuner card (TV card) and LS120 unit from his computer, at the applicant's expense. The removal costs borne by the applicant were $139.08. The value of the LS120 unit and TV tuner card amounted to $505.99. On June 10, 2004, the applicant's computer was returned to him without the problematic peripheral equipment.