[26]
In order to dispose of the application for judicial review at bar, therefore, only the following additional comments are needed. First, the adoption of a coherent and predictable policy on staff safety, and even on the safety of the prison population, is of cardinal importance in the penitentiary system. Directive 090, dealing with the possession of computers with certain peripheral equipment in cells, is thus very important. Any means of communication between inmates, or even between inmates and persons from outside the penitentiary, is clearly unacceptable. That is why the bringing in of new computers and peripheral equipment must be scrupulously controlled by the Service. The Commissioner's general concerns are thus legitimate, in view of the breathtaking speed at which the data processing field is evolving. The basis for the current limitations is not known to the Court, but I imagine it has to do with a data processing concern such as the power of computers after that date. I can only speculate as to the specific reasons the Commissioner may have had in prohibiting the purchase of new computers after October 2002 and limiting the use of peripheral equipment previously authorized. The respondents chose not to file any affidavit from the persons responsible for adopting and implementing Directive 090. At the same time, Directive 090 also recognizes that certain individuals suffering from visual or physical handicaps need in certain circumstances to use peripheral equipment and software developed for their requirements. That is the applicant's situation. Thus, I do not have to decide here whether the loss of the disputed peripheral equipment in the case at bar is an infringement of the equality right claimed by the applicant on account of his visual disability. In any case, the current policy authorizes the possession of non-compliant computers and peripheral equipment in the case of inmates who obtained leave before October 2002 to keep them. That is the applicant's situation. The Commissioner undoubtedly may choose in future to cancel any acquired right of the applicant and other inmates, by again amending Directive 090, but I do not have to decide at this time whether such a decision would be legal. Suffice it to say that Directive 090 currently recognizes the applicant's acquired rights.