[25]
The
Sparvier
decision, above, offers considerable guidance for dealing with the kinds of issues raised in the case at bar. Justice Marshall Rothstein dealt with a challenge to an election tribunal established by the custom of an Indian band. As in this case, the challenge was made on the basis of alleged procedural irregularities and bias. There, however, the tribunal had dealt with the election appeal before its authority to do so was questioned. Notwithstanding that difference, I do not believe that the
Sparvier
decision is distinguishable from this one. Justice Rothstein's decision clearly defines the scope of the duty of fairness that must be applied by an election tribunal of this type. He held at paragraphs 47, 48, 51 and 52 as follows:
"47 While I accept the importance of an autonomous process for electing band governments, in my opinion, minimum standards of natural justice or procedural fairness must be met. I fully recognize that the political movement of Aboriginal People taking more control over their lives should not be quickly interfered with by the courts. However, members of bands are individuals who, in my opinion, are entitled to due process and procedural fairness in procedures of tribunals that affect them. To the extent that this Court has jurisdiction, the principles of natural justice and procedural fairness are to be applied.
"48 In deciding what 'principles' should apply to the matter at bar, I have had regard to the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
Lakeside Colony of Hutterian Brethren v. Hofer
, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 165, where at page 195 of the decision, Gonthier, J., for the majority, states:
'The content of the principles of natural justice is flexible and depends upon the circumstances in which the question arises. However, the most basic requirements are that of notice, opportunity to make representations, and an unbiased tribunal.'
"In the case at bar, there is an Appeal Tribunal that is empowered to make decisions affecting elections and the rights of candidates in those elections. Its powers entitle it to uphold an election or order a new election. It has a duty to consider appeals alleging election practices which contravene the
Act
or illegal, corrupt or criminal practices on the part of candidates. (sic)
. . . . .
"¶ 51 I am satisfied that the Appeal Tribunal, in this case, had an obligation to conduct its proceedings in accordance with rules of procedural fairness. In
Cardinal et al. v. Director of Kent Institution
, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 643, Le Dain, J., stated at page 661:
'The right to a fair hearing must be regarded as an independent, unqualified right which finds its essential justification in the sense of procedural justice which any person affected by an administrative decision is entitled to have.'
"There is no question that the candidates in a band election are affected by a decision of an appeal tribunal. Whether the Appeal Tribunal is considered to be acting judically, quasi-judically or administratively, a fair hearing is essential. (sic)
"52 Having come to this conclusion, I am of the opinion that the basic requirements set forth by Gonthier, J., in
Hofer
, supra, are applicable to the Appeal Tribunal of the Cowessess Indian Band No. 73. These [page 163] are the requirements of an unbiased tribunal, notice and the opportunity to make representations."
The above analysis accords fully with my own views and I unreservedly apply it to the facts of this case.