[30]
In
Sparvier
, above, Justice Rothstein was faced with this same issue. There, too, the constitution of a Band Appeal Tribunal was challenged on the basis of a failure to observe a timing requirement for the selection of members. In rejecting the same argument that has been made here, Justice Rothstein held:
"27 In my view, an important reason for electing the Appeal Tribunal before the nomination meeting is that it will be in place throughout the election process to deal with the matters over which it has jurisdiction. Another reason for it being constituted before the nomination meeting may be that its members will, at an early stage, avoid becoming involved in a partisan way in the election. Neither reason, however, suggests that the timing of the election of the Appeal Tribunal is of such overriding importance that non-compliance with the timing requirement of paragraph 6(4)(a) should result in the actions of an appeal tribunal elected after a nomination meeting being of no legal effect.
"28 In my opinion, if the Tribunal is not elected until some portion of the election process has taken place, it may still deal with appeals once it is constituted. If any member finds that he or she has become aligned with a candidate in such a manner as to raise a reasonable apprehension of bias, he or she should not accept election to the Appeal Tribunal.
"29 Invalidating the actions of an appeal tribunal solely because it was elected after the nomination date could well work a serious inconvenience or injustice to the members of the Band who have no control over those entrusted with ensuring compliance with the
Act
. I am satisfied that the provision requiring that the Appeal Tribunal be elected before the nomination meeting is, in the context of the
Act
, directory and not mandatory, and that non-compliance does not result in the Appeal Tribunal not being properly constituted. Nor does non-compliance invalidate the election process or the actions or orders of the Appeal Tribunal."
The above remarks have equal application to the circumstances of this case.