[58]
The moving party made the following admissions in paragraphs 4 and 6 of its statement of defence and counterclaim dated August 27, 1998.
"1) With respect to the plaintiff Microsoft:
a) In November 1997, McArthur Thompson leased 15 new computers to replace their older, out-moded system. The older system contained none of the Microsoft computer software programs in respect of which the plaintiff Corporation (hereinafter 'Microsoft') alleges copyright infringement and did not have the capacity to operate those computer programs.
b) In the fall of 1997, McArthur Thompson contracted with the defendant KLJ Computer Solutions Incorporated (hereinafter 'KLJ') to advise it on the purchase and installation of a new Microsoft based system. On the basis of discussions with KLJ and advice received from it, McArthur Thompson agreed to lease 15 new computers, 15 copies of Microsoft's computer operating program Windows 95 and two copies of Microsoft's Office 97 suite of programs. The Office 97 suite includes the Microsoft programs known as Access 97, PowerPoint 97, Word 97, Excel 97 and Outlook 97. McArthur Thompson believed that the licenses purchased by it for the Office 97 computer program authorized its use in all its new computers.
c) The plaintiffs conducted a search and seize raid of the premises of McArthur Thompson on January 7, 1998 pursuant to an Anton Piller Order issued herein by this Honourable Court. KLJ was then still in the process of installing the new computer system. McArthur Thompson acknowledges that KLJ, as of January 7, 1998 had not provided it with the license or licenses necessary to authorize the installation of Office 97 in all its new computers and that KLJ had installed Windows 95 Plus 4.40 over the basic Windows 95 which it, McArthur Thompson, had ordered. McArthur Thompson says, however, that it believed the Office 97 Microsoft computer programs being installed in its new computers were properly licensed. McArthur Thompson says that it did not know that Windows 95 Plus 4.40 was being installed over the Windows 95 program which it had ordered and paid for. McArthur Thompson, immediately after the plaintiffs' raid of January 7, 1998, discharged KLJ from the project, purchased Microsoft licenses for programs appropriate to its needs, erased or deleted programs which it had not ordered and did not need, and retained new consultants to audit its software and carry on and complete the project initiated by KLJ. Certainly, as of January 15, 1998, McArthur Thompson had licenses for all the plaintiffs' computer programs.
"2) With respect to the plaintiff Adobe
a) As to the general claim of Adobe Systems Incorporated, McArthur Thompson acknowledges as a result of information received following the plaintiffs' raid of January 7, 1998, that unknown to it, among its Adobe programs, licenses for the following computer programs either had not been obtained or could not be located. These computer programs had been installed at some unascertained time in the past by persons presently unknown to McArthur Thompson for purposes now largely unknown:
(a) one copy of Illustrator 6.0
(b) one copy of PageMaker
(c) three copies of Streamline
b) McArthur Thompson says that the Streamline programs are not being used and had not been used for some considerable period of time and that PageMaker had been provided for a single purpose by a client needing a product requiring its use and while it has one Illustrator license, a copy had been installed in another computer. McArthur Thompson has used Illustrator in the past, but has no present use for it. McArthur Thompson has, regardless of whether these programs are of any use or value to it, purchased licenses for these programs."