 [23] 
  The Respondent submits that the record before the Court validates the Officer's assessment of Mr. Barboza's work experience. The Respondent relies heavily on the affidavit of the Officer. The Respondent quotes the following from the Officer's affidavit regarding the Officer's assessment of Mr. Barboza's work experience: 
 
 
 
 5. In a covering letter to his updated application and document ( 
 Certified Tribunal Record 
 , at pp. 9 - 10), Mr. Barboza stated that he is currently employed with Lloyd's TSB in Dubai in the capacity of "Senior Corporate Relationship Manager" and that he had attached a recently issued job description. I reviewed Mr. Barboza's work experience documents ( 
 Certified Tribunal Record 
 , at pp. 55 - 67). These consisted of a letter dated August 5, 2008, from Jennifer O'Gara, HR consultant, to Mr. Barboza congratulating him on his new position of Senior Relationship Manager and confirming his remuneration as of August 1, 2008; a generic "Role Specification" for "Relationship Manager" dated November 2009; a contract of employment dated March 25, 2010 between Mr. Barboza and Lloyd's TSB; a copy of a pay slip for Mr. Barboza's salary for September 2010; and a letter dated June 2010 from Vivek Vohra, Head of Corporate Banking, Lloyd's TSB, Middle east, congratulating Mr. Barboza on achieving 15 years of service with Lloyd's TSB Group, with a length of service certificate attached. 
 
 
 
 6. Mr. Barboza had been directed to provided job descriptions endorsed by his employer's personnel department covering the period from 10 years prior to his application date up to the present and that the employment letters contain details of his duties and clearly show the start and end dates (if relevant) of his employment.  
 I noted that apart from Mr. Barboza's own assertions, the only document which provided details of his job duties and responsibilities was the generic "Role Specification" for a Relationship Manager dated November 2009. 
  The contract of employment as a banking operations manager dated March 25, 2010, provided no details about the duties of the position, or confirmation that Mr. Barboza actually worked as such. Although the "Role Specification" for a Relationship Manager was a generic document that did not contain Mr. Barboza's name and that related to a different position to the one specified in the letter of August 1, 2008 from Jennifer O'Gara, I gave Mr. Barboza the benefit of the doubt and, pursuant to paragraph 80(1)(a) of the  
 Regulations 
 , awarded him 15 points for one year but less than two years of work experience in his designated occupation. I was not satisfied that Mr. Barboza's documentation constituted sufficient evidence for an award of any additional points in the category of work experience. [Emphasis added]