[35]
According to the Federal Court of Appeal in
Berrahma v. Ministre de l'Emploi et de l'Immigration
(1992), 132 N.R. 202 (F.C.A.), eligibility screening to make a claim to refugee status does not infringe s. 7 of the
Charter
. In that case, the applicant was found to be ineligible to make a claim pursuant to ss. 46.01(1)(c) and (5) of the
Act
, because the applicant was a refused claimant who had not been outside Canada for more than 90 days after his first claim was refused. The Court of Appeal held that there was no right to make a refugee claim and that Parliament had the right to declare certain persons ineligible to make a refugee claim in Canada. At p. 212 to 213 Mr. Justice Marceau made the following comments:
"There seems no question that the adjudicator's reasoning cannot stand; and yet, one cannot disagree with several of the propositions contained in it. In my view the problem results from his starting-point, the initial proposition which as we have seen the adjudicator accepted without hesitation. The legislation which in certain circumstances does not allow a foreign national to claim refugee status, the adjudicator said, infringes his life and security, as the Supreme Court held in
Singh
. This statement, on which his entire reasoning depends, seems to me to be simply mistaken.
"I absolutely cannot see how it can be said that, by denying refuge to a foreign national, Parliament is infringing that person's life or security. Section 7 of the
Charter
is not to be interpreted in the abstract; it lays down limits for the action of governmental authority, but does not compel the latter to act; for it to be applicable, there must be a specific act, legislation, not merely a failure to act. It does not of itself impose a duty on the government to provide protection to everyone whose life or liberty may be at risk, still less to provide a refuge for all inhabitants of the globe who may fear for their lives or security, and this is so whatever the cause of the apprehended danger.
"As I understand it, the reason the Supreme Court concluded as it did in Singh is that, to give effect to international obligations assumed earlier, Parliament had recognized and granted foreign nationals the right to claim refugee status, but failed at the same time to create along with the exercise of this right - a right connected with the protection of life and security - a procedure consistent with the requirements of fundamental justice. That, I think is the difference between
Singh
and the case of an ineligible claimant.
Singh
was denied a status which the law gave him the right to claim without having any opportunity of showing that he met the conditions for obtaining it, whereas the ineligible claimant is not denied a status he is entitled to claim.
"One can easily imagine conditions of eligibility in legislation dealing with aliens seeking refuge which would infringe the precepts of the
Charter
. We need go no further than the requirements of s. 15, for example (whether they correspond to or go beyond the obligations resulting from Article 3 of the Convention). However, I do not see how it can be said that by limiting the right to claim refugee status in an objective and non-discriminatory manner - as it did, Parliament infringed the provisions of s. 7. In my opinion, therefore, the adjudicator and member of the Division were right in concluding that the constitutional argument made by counsel for the applicant was not valid. I would therefore dismiss this application to set aside made against the decision rendered by them."