[39]
In response, the respondent, cites two decisions of the Trial Division in which both justices held that the voluntary removal of an applicant cannot be regarded as "execution" of the deportation order. In particular, the respondent refers to the decision of Mr. Justice Joyal in
Mercier v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1986), 14 F.T.R. 28 (T.D.), in which he held that an individual who had a deportation order issued against him on the basis of his criminal activities had not "executed" his deportation order by voluntarily leaving Canada for a short period of time. That applicant sought to make a claim to refugee status upon his return to Canada, but due to his outstanding deportation order, could not make his claim. At p. 30, Joyal, J., wrote:
"In my opinion, the matter falls within s. 54 of the
Act
in the context of the provisions of the other sections of the statute under the heading Execution of Orders. Section 54(1) deals with voluntary departure. It reads as follows:
'54(1) Unless otherwise directed by the Minister, a person, against whom a removal order is made may be allowed to leave Canada voluntarily and to select the country for which he wishes to depart.'"
On the basis of the section Mr. Justice Joyal held at p. 30:
"I conclude from the foregoing that s. 54 is clear on this point. The voluntary departure of someone who is the subject of a deportation order can only be made under the
Act
with leave. It was not in dispute that such leave was never given to the applicant ...
"In the absence of such leave, the applicant cannot argue that he carried out the removal order himself. His visit to Haiti, or to any other country, does not count and the order remains fully in effect.
"In my opinion, any other conclusion would be incompatible with the wording of s. 54 of the
Act
and inconsistent with the meaning and scope of its other provisions. Further, any other conclusion would be likely to bring into disrepute the administration of the
Immigration Act
and the fair and generous system provided by it."
The learned judge interpreted "may be allowed to leave" as meaning "may be accorded the Minister's permission".