[1]
Muldoon, J.
[orally]: The court is ready to render a decision. This is an unfortunate case, an unfortunate case from the point of view of the applicant, who, in his juvenile immaturity, made some bad errors, but there is no provision in the law to say that errors made while a juvenile, or a young person, are all forgiven. The applicant challenges, by way of application for judicial review, the oral decision of Paul Tetrault, an immigration adjudicator, dated October 15th, 1997, wherein Tetrault determined that the applicant was not a permanent resident, and that he therefore had no alternative but to issue a deportation order pursuant to s. 32(6) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1-28, which the court refers to as the
Act
. Leave to commence an application for judicial review was granted on August 5th, 1998. The applicant, Devon Alwyn De Freitas, is a 28 year old citizen of St. Vincent, a small Caribbean island just west of Barbados. The applicant came to Canada, and indeed to Toronto, where his parents already resided, on a visitor's visa on March 3rd, 1984. His visitor's visa was extended until March 19th, 1985. He was reported on February 5th, 1986 for overstaying his visitor status, however, his mother sponsored his application for permanent residence, and an order-in-council was granted in his favour on November 28th, 1986 allowing him to apply for permanent residence from within Canada, and therefore the inquiry notice was withdrawn. On September 4th, 1987, his sister and brother signed their permanent resident documents at the C.I.C. office in Mississauga, Ontario. The applicant had been expected to attend at this meeting as well, as mentioned in the application record in the statutory declaration of Mitsui Debra De Freitas, p. 19. However, the applicant was unavailable because he was residing in a "Home For Boys" at that time, and the Department of Immigration never contacted him with regard to signing a record of landing. Now there is some vagueness there. One must assume that someone contacted the De Freitas children or their parents to come and sign the permanent resident documents. What is a "Home For Boys"? The court has little choice in accepting that that means a juvenile detention centre to which the applicant had been committed for 12 months' secure custody. That is what his sister, whose affidavit is filed in support of his application, said, that he was in a "Home For Boys," at that time. The applicant speaks of involvement with the law, another euphemism like "Home For Boys". He means that he committed offences; that was his involvement with the law. He was convicted of assault with a weapon, possession of a weapon, and assault causing bodily harm in Toronto youth court. That is why he was in custody. And he was sentenced, as the file indicates, on January 10th, 1985, which would account for his being in custody for 12 months from then. Why he was in custody on September 4th, 1987 in a "Home For Boys" may mean that he had committed other offences later, after he was released. He has had several run-ins with the law. March 28th, 1988 he was convicted of three counts of uttering a forged document, on December 6th, 1990 of two other offences, and also on January 31st, 1991 of aggravated assault and possession of a weapon dangerous to the public peace. These latter offences make him an inadmissible person pursuant to s. 19(1)(c) of the
Act
, which renders inadmissible those persons convicted in Canada of offences carrying a maximum sentence of 10 years or more. The applicant is presently lodged in Stony Mountain Institution, a federal penitentiary in Manitoba. An immigration inquiry for the applicant began in Edmonton on March 6th, 1996 and ended on December 16th, 1996 after the applicant failed to appear due to his latest arrest. The inquiry thereafter resumed on August 14th, 1997 in Winnipeg and was adjourned subsequently until September 11th, and finally until October 15th, 1997 when the decision of Adjudicator Tetrault was finally rendered. It is worth noting as well that the history of the applicant's immigration file is rather convoluted and kafkaesque; it is a paper trail which is kafkaesque. On June 26th, 1991 a certificate was signed by Jean Yves Prevost, an immigration officer and head of the Query Response Centre. That affidavit indicates that the applicant was recorded as having been issued a student authorization. On that same date, two other signed certificates indicate that he was recorded neither as having been admitted as a visitor as of January 1st, 1980 until June 26th, 1991, nor landed. However, on July 23rd, 1996 the applicant received a query response from the Query Response Centre in Hull stating that he is not recorded as ever having been a documented visitor or student, and further that he is not recorded as landed. Yet another certificate dated October 10th, 1997 and signed by Denis Bertrand indicates that the applicant is not recorded as landed for the period February 5th, 1986 to October 10th, 1997. On July 15th, 1996, Mr. Prevost was made aware of the contradictory certificates he signed and commenced an investigation. He determined that the January 23rd, 1996 searches were inaccurate as they were only conducted on the Field Operational Support System which he called FOSS, as if we would all understand what that meant without knowing what it stood for, and not on the micro-film files as well. After redoing the search, Mr. Prevost concluded on July 15th, 1996 that the applicant is not recorded as having been a visitor, but is recorded as having a student authorization from March 22nd, 1984 until March 19th, 1985 with no further extensions granted. As well, the applicant is not recorded as having been landed. The FOSS system does not indicate whether a file is active, archived or destroyed, but does show that file number 41336514 is a Winnipeg C.I.C. file and file number 3296-1-68202 is an Etobicoke C.I.C. file. The latter file was transferred to the Mississauga Record Centre in June of 1990, thus it was not in Etobicoke C.I.C.'s possession when the 1991 request was made. It should also be noted that this file was assigned a new number, 3294-6-7500, upon its transfer to Mississauga. Any remaining documents on file have been sent to the applicant's counsel in response to an access-for-information request and they reveal no record of landing having ever been prepared by the applicant. Perhaps the court can be forgiven for having suggested this paper trail is kafkaesque. The oral hearing held before Adjudicator Tetrault on August 15th, 1997 resulted in a decision at that time. The applicant was determined not to be a permanent resident and a deportation order was issued pursuant to s. 32(6) of the
Act
. The Adjudicator's reasons are a matter of record on the file and he certainly considered the Federal Court of Appeal decision in
Dass v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, which is reported at (1996), 193 N.R. 309, and the Adjudicator was concerned about that and finally made his decision. He says in his decision:
"So I acknowledge that some of these elements have been met, but they must be met in totality and that was not done in your case. The document was not delivered to you, and as the
Dass
decision says, there was no such document delivered in this case, and in your case there was no such document delivered, so whether or not the document was actually prepared, I do not see it as being the critical factor. Given these points, it is my decision that you are not a permanent resident of Canada, and as refers to the allegation, the allegation is substantiated, therefore it is my decision that you are in violation of paragraph 27(2)(a) by 19(1)(c). I have no alternative but to order your deportation from Canada, and I hereby order you deported."