[5]
Here, it would seem that whether the applicant positively decided not to attend on September 4th, 1987, or willy-nilly was unable to attend because he was in custody as his sister deposed, in any event he appeared to have abandoned, one way or another, abandoned his application for landing, and certainly therefore had no legitimate expectation. But then one comes to Mr. Justice Strayer's remark, "After changes of circumstances, after he has been convicted of serious criminal offences, he is no longer eligible for landing." All the order-in-council did was to permit him to make an application for landing within Canada. That he might have done, and perhaps he did, but he chose, or was prevented because of his own misconduct, from completing that application; in fact, he abandoned it. And therefore, it seems to this court that he has no legitimate complaint. It is always extremely tragic to see young people who, in the full flight of their immaturities, do stupid things and get themselves into trouble and get their exercise of what ordinarily would be ordinary rights aborted, as in this case, where the application for landing was aborted by being abandoned because the applicant either, according to his sister, was in a "Home For Boys," or according to his interview with Ms Pawlowsky, decided not to go through with it. And then he committed serious criminal offences and now he is no longer eligible for landing, never having been landed. Canada would have to be some sort of chump to be expected to accept a person such as the applicant as a landed immigrant, leading perhaps some day towards citizenship. He has shown himself to be someone who cannot abide by the laws of Canada, and rather than have him admitted and imprisoned who knows how often, Canada is entitled to say, "You shall not be admitted. You have had a chance, you have had two chances. You have had a chance as a young offender and as a young adult, and you have, in effect, not been fair to Canada. If Canada had some legitimate expectation that you would keep the peace and be of good behaviour, you have breached that legitimate expectation of Canada." And so while the court can sympathize with the applicant, the court cannot accede to his application for judicial review which will be dismissed.