[1]
Dubé, J.
: This motion by the applicant ("Leif Höegh & Co. A̸S") is for an order staying the operation of the Notice of Liability to Convey and/or Pay Removal Costs ("the Notice of Liability") issued by or on behalf of the respondent ("the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration") on May 11, 1995, concerning John Salilar to whom a deportation order was issued on March 7, 1995, pending the outcome of the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review.
Facts
[2]
Mr. Salilar was one of five stowaways that boarded the "MV Höegh Duke" ("the Vessel") in Bombay, India, in December 1991. When the vessel arrived in Halifax, Nova Scotia, in January 1992, the five stowaways were taken off the Vessel by Canadian Immigration authorities.
[3]
A deposit pursuant to s. 92 of the
Immigration Act
("the
Act
") in the amount of $3,000 per stowaway was made by the law firm of McInnes Cooper & Robertson on behalf of the applicant. Mr. Salilar then applied, unsuccessfully, for refugee status, and on March 7, 1995, was the subject of a deportation order. During his time in Canada, Mr. Salilar was convicted of a number of
Criminal Code
offenses including possession of a weapon, theft, uttering threats, mischief, and assault on two separate occasions.
[4]
On May 4, 1995, the respondent issued a Notice of Liability directed to Pacific Commerce Line in Vancouver ordering that Mr. Salilar be placed on board the "MV Höegh Minerva" in Vancouver. That Notice of Liability was subsequently withdrawn and on May 11, 1995, the Notice of Liability which is the subject of this motion was issued. It is the intention of the respondent to compel the applicant to take Mr. Salilar on board the Vessel which is presently in the Port of Halifax and which is scheduled to depart on Wednesday May 17, 1995, for various ports in Africa and Asia.
Issue
[5]
The test to be met for a stay is set out in the decision of
Toth v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1988), 86 N.R. 302; 6 Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (F.C.A.). In order to succeed, the applicant must show: 1- a serious issue to be tried; 2- irreparable harm; and 3- the balance of convenience.
a) Serious Issue:
[6]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that there are serious issues to be tried which include the following:
(i) the Vessel in question in 1992 was owned by Lombard Maritime Limited and is today owned by H. Shipping Limited. The obligation to remove or convey, if any, is that of Lombard Maritime Limited, who is no longer the owner of the Vessel;
(ii) the Vessel is a multi-purpose cargo ship and is employed for that purpose. Under the
Act
, as it existed in January of 1992, a transportation company was said to be "... a person or group of persons carrying or providing for the transportation of persons, ...". That definition is distinct from that found in the present
Act
which defines a transportation company as "... a person or group of persons, including any agent thereof and the Government of Canada, a province or a municipality in Canada, transporting or providing for the transportation of persons or goods by vehicle or otherwise ...". As the Vessel is utilized for carrying cargo not persons, under the operative legislation the owner of that vessel is not a transportation company and therefore the obligations set out in Part V, including the obligation to remove or convey, has no application to the applicant or its predecessor;
(iii) paragraph 88(1)(b) is not statutory authority entitling Immigration Canada to order that an individual be placed on board a specific vessel. This is quite clear when read in the context of Part V in general and in particular ss. 85 and 87. To interpret s. 88 in the manner suggested by the respondent would lead to a situation in which an individual is placed on board a vehicle regardless of whether that person will be in a position to legally disembark from that vehicle;
(iv) section 85 sets out the Minister's ability to order a transportation company to convey a person. In this case the operative provision is paragraph 85(1)(c) which makes the removal subject to s. 52(2) or (3). These subsections are premised on there being a country willing to receive the person in question. There is no evidence to suggest that India is willing to receive Mr. Salilar.
[7]
During the conference call on this matter which was held on May 16, 1995, counsel for the respondent conceded that there was a serious issue to be tried.
b) Irreparable Harm
[8]
The applicant maintains that if the stay is not granted, it will suffer irreparable harm that cannot be compensated by way of monetary award, and in particular refers to the following: (a) Mr. Salilar having been convicted of numerous criminal offenses and obviously not wanting to leave Canada may be a danger to the 31 crew members and vessel if he is placed on board; (b) the Vessel, with an undocumented passenger on board, may be fined, delayed, arrested, or refused entry into a port, all of which will be financially costly to her owner and would likely be detrimental to the reputation and goodwill of her owner in providing a reliable liner service between the ports in question; and (c) Mr. Salilar himself would have to be locked in quarters and would have to be guarded around the clock, which situation could continue for an indefinite period of time if Mr. Salilar, given his lack of documentation and proof of nationality, is not permitted to disembark at any of the ports visited by the Vessel.
[9]
Counsel for the respondent submits that personal inconvenience does not constitute irreparable harm for the purposes of a stay application (FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). He sees no apparent danger to the crew members if Mr. Salilar is properly locked up and kept under surveillance. According to the respondent, it is mere speculation to argue that the ship will be denied access to any ports and there is no evidence that India will not accept Mr. Salilar.
[10]
In my view, the presence of this unwanted and dangerous passenger on board does create a serious problem to the crew and to the owners. That difficult situation is compounded by the fact that the stowaway has no documents and most likely cannot be disembarked at any port. There is no evidence that Bombay authorities will accept him and Canadian authorities are not suggesting any other port of entry. Thus, it does appear at this stage, that without a stay Mr. Salilar would become a forlorn passenger sailing forever on the world's seven seas. Of course, that would cause irreparable harm, perhaps not for Mr. Salilar, but clearly for the applicant of this motion, particularly since the vessel in question is not a passenger but a cargo vessel.
c) Balance Of Convenience
[11]
As stressed by counsel for the applicant, Mr. Salilar is presently in custody. He has been in Canada for four years and there will be no irreparable harm to the respondent should he remain in Canada for the time required to complete the leave application for judicial review. I agree that the balance of convenience strongly favours a stay.
[12]
Should the application for leave and/or the judicial review not succeed, the applicant is prepared to have Mr. Salilar placed on board the earliest possible Höegh vessel leaving Halifax and agrees to undertake to pay any damages ordered by the court. The itinerary of the applicant's vessels indicates, as set out in exhibit "D" of the affidavit of Bonnie Fulton, that there is a Höegh vessel in Halifax approximately once every two weeks, so there is no real urgency to the instant Notice of Liability issued by the Minister.
[13]
For the above reasons, the stay application was granted by me on May 16, 1995, following a telephone conference.
Application granted.
Editor: Jean Merlini/klf
[End of document]
