[25]
The 1976 agreement then provides in part C for distribution of television product. Limited and B.V. confirm that pursuant to earlier agreements Limited had granted to B.V. the rights to distribute the product under a sole and exclusive license for television for all areas of the world outside the United States, except Puerto Rico and the two television stations earlier referred to, in Mexico and in Windsor. The term of the agreement is confirmed to extend to 1986. The agreement provided that B.V. was entitled to 30% of the "Television Gross Receipts" as defined, and by clause C.3.(a) the balance, in excess of its share and of all costs incurred for prints used on television, is received by B.V. "as a collection agency for the account of Limited or the owner of the television product as may be determined under the agreements existing between Limited and such owners". All distribution expenses, including advertising, publicity and B.V.'s administrative and operating expenses, excluding expenses for prints for television, are borne under the agreement by B.V. and are not deducted from television gross receipts. Those receipts are defined to include any and all sums which accrue to or to the order of B.V. with respect to the distribution or televising of any or all of the television product, less bad debts, and all sums accruing to B.V. from infringement or interference by third parties with the television product, net of legal expenses for recovery, and less bad debts. B.V. is entitled to recover any costs it incurred for prints used on television from the balance of gross receipts to which Limited is entitled, for all costs of such prints are to be borne by Limited. Excluded from gross receipts are any amounts that cannot be remitted to B.V. in the Netherlands so long as they are unremittable and also excluded are amounts accruing to B.V. for use of trailers (advertising product for use on television) that it produces. A provision for bad debts stipulates that B.V. shall use sound judgment and due diligence in granting credit to any television exhibitor, shall collect all unpaid amounts and shall retain, at its expense, collection agencies and lawyers to collect and sue for recovery of any unpaid amounts, which, as noted, are television gross receipts when collected.