[29]
Mr. George Smith, a lawyer and vice-president of the parent company, MCA Inc., responsible for tax matters of the parent and its subsidiary companies, and an officer of several subsidiaries as well, who signed the 1976 agreement on behalf of Universal, testified in support of the plaintiff's submissions. The description, "as a collection agency" for the function of some subsidiaries had been used in earlier agreements with a view to persuading tax authorities in the United States to approve an accounting process that would match receipts by the U.S. companies with time periods at which revenues were accrued in order to also match taxes withheld, particularly abroad, with tax years applicable under the United States law. It was for this reason these words had been used in the 1970 agreement between Universal and B.V. and in a sublicensing agreement between B.V. and C.I.C. relating to distribution of theatrical product outside the U.S. and Canada. Similarly the description was used in a 1971 agreement between the predecessor of Limited and B.V. under which the latter obtained world-wide distribution rights to television product outside the United States, Puerto Rico, Canada and designated television stations. But in that same year, 1971, a comparable agreement, between the predecessor of Limited and B.V. for distribution by B.V. of television product in Canada, had excluded the description of B.V. as a collection agency, because under the Canada-Netherlands Income Tax Treaty withholding tax was not applicable to the receipts of B.V. from Canadian exhibitors of television product. Those arrangements under prior agreements were intended to be continued under the 1976 agreement. The previous description of the relationship between B.V. and Universal was reflected in the 1976 agreement in relation to receipts for exhibition of theatrical product, and for receipts from Canada. B.V. was not described as a collection agency, though it was so described in relation to receipts from C.I.C. for distribution and exhibition of theatrical product in other countries. By oversight, a parallel exclusion of receipts from Canadian exhibitors of television product was not made, though that is what the parties had intended.