[78]
I turn to other aids to interpretation suggested by the parties. The first is dictionary definitions and the second is terminology as used in the industry. Definitions offered here included the following for the words "motion picture" and "film":
from
Random House Dictionary of the English Language: The Unabridged Edition
(Random House, New York, 1983)
"motion picture: 1. A sequence of consecutive pictures of objects photographed in motion by a specially designed camera and thrown on a screen by a projector ... in such rapid succession as to give the illusion of natural movement. 2. a play, event, or the like, presented in this form;
"film, n. 3. Photog. a. a cellulose nitrate or cellulose acetate composition made in thin sheets or strips and coated with a sensitive emulsion for taking photographs. b. a strip or roll of this ... 4. Motion pictures. a. the film strip containing the photographs exhibited in a motion picture machine ... 5. films, a. motion pictures collectively ... c. motion pictures, as a genre of art of entertainment;"
and from
Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language
, Second Edition, Unabridged (C. Merriam Company: Springfield, 1959):
"motion picture. a. A series of pictures, usually photographs taken with a special machine, a motion picture camera ... presented to the eye in very rapid succession, with some or all of the objects in the picture represented in successive positions slightly changed, and producing, because of the persistence of vision, the optical effect of a continuous picture in which the objects move. b. Specif. a photoplay. A machine for projecting and showing motion pictures on a screen is a motion picture machine ...;"
and from the
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
(Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1973)
"film - 3. Photog. A thin pellicle or coating of collodion, gelatin, etc. spread on photographic paper or plates, or used by itself instead of a plate ... b. A celluloid roll of film used for a cinema picture."