 [7] 
  On June 22, 2010 the Advisory Body met to consider Mr. Clue's case and it again recommended to the Director that Mr. Clue's TSC be revoked. The minutes of the Advisory Body discussion indicate that it took the following key points into consideration: 
 
 
 
 - The Advisory Body noted the severity of the incident as described in the YYZ Intel Report. 
 
 
 
 - The Advisory Body noted that the police report states he indicated that even if he know[s] who was involved (in the incident involving the duffle bag) he would not divulge their identity to police (see paragraph 11(d) or YYZ Intel Report). 
 
 
 
 - The Advisory Body further noted paragraphs 12-20 of the applicant's affidavit, and that he does not explain or deny his involvement in the incident involvement the gun and the duffle bag. 
 
 
 
 - The Advisory Body members noted the applicant's submissions, including his affidavit, do not contain any information that would mitigate their concerns. 
 
 
 
 The above-noted Intelligence Report considered by the Advisory Body contains an outline of an investigation into Mr. Clue's behaviour carried out by the Airport Intelligence Unit. In that report the incident involving the handgun is described as follows: 
 
 
 
 In one of these investigations, subject  
 CLUE 
  was observed on Saturday June 6, 2009, placing a ' 
 gym bag 
 ' onto one of the containers # 43121 bound for Air Transat flight # TS784 to Montego Bay, Jamaica. This event was investigated and the bag was found to contain a fully loaded (16) round clip Smith & Wesson 9mm handgun and 2 bags containing hollow point ammunition. Names of all employees (RAIC's) working the flight were obtained by members of CBSA. 
 
 
 
 Subject  
 CLUE 
  was the key suspect for this event but due to other employees also having access to the bag and aircraft after it was placed on the aircraft, along with protection of the confidential source,  
 CLUE 
  was not charged for this event. 
 
 
 
 [Footnotes omitted] 
