[12]
The panel determined that the applicant did not establish that he was involved in political activities with the UFC. The panel dismissed the probative value of the UFC membership card because of other documentary evidence. The applicant claims that the panel should not have disregarded his credible testimony with regard to the steps he took to get his membership card because of the other documentary evidence.
Moreover, when asked to describe the steps he took to obtain his UFC membership card, the claimant said that he went to their offices and presented his identity card and photograph. His membership card was issued the next day. From the outset, the panel noted a discrepancy between the claimant’s national identity card (Exhibit P–10) and his UFC membership card (Exhibit P–11). Exhibit P–10 shows that the claimant lived in “Lomé, qt Adéwui mson Kikina Biachi” [sic], while the address indicated on his UFC membership card (Exhibit P–11) is “Qt. Bè-Apeyemé, Lomé/Togo.”
Furthermore, the claimant was confronted with independent and reliable documentary evidence that relates to Article 10 of the UFC’s statutes, which reads as follows:
ARTICLE 10
Applications for membership, as from the date of permanent establishment of the UFC shall be made in writing, dated, signed and sent to the National Office which will make a decision after considering whether to accept the applicant. The decision whether to accept the applicant may be delegated to the presidents of the federations.
The claimant changed his testimony to say that he had signed some papers. He was confronted with another document that stated the following:
Even though the party statutes require the president to sign each membership card, it is Emmanuel Akitani Bob, the executive vice-president of the UFC, who is currently signing them because the party president, Gilchrist Olympio, resides outside the country.
The claimant was also confronted with the fact that, on his membership card, the signature of “Gilchrist Olympio,” president of the UFC, appears in print and that it is not an original signature. The claimant answered that the seal had already been affixed to the card and that many people were authorized to sign the membership cards. That answer is contradictory to the reliable documentary evidence from a legitimate source, which the panel finds more credible than the claimant’s testimony.
(Panel’s decision, September 8, 2005, tribunal record at pages 6 and 7)