 [37] 
  Moreover, this Court has already ruled on this issue more than once. By way of illustration, this is what my colleague, Justice Mactavish, wrote in  
 Suleyman 
 , above, at paragraphs 52 to 57: 
 
 
 
 52. According to Mr. Suleyman, it is impossible to fall outside the exclusion clause of the Refugee Convention, and still come within paragraph 34(1)( 
 f 
 ) of  
 IRPA 
  by virtue of paragraph 34(1)( 
 b 
 ), given that engaging in, or instigating the subversion by force of any government is a serious non-political crime. 
 
 
 
 53. This argument has already been rejected by this Court. That is, in  
 Omer v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2007] F.C.J. No. 642, Justice Blais considered the relationship between exclusion under Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and inadmissibility under paragraph 34(1)(f) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Act 
 , observing that the two determinations involved quite different considerations. 
 
 
 
 54. In this regard, Justice Blais stated at paragraph 11 of his decision that: 
 
 
 
 It should also be noted that, in its decision, the Board found the applicant to be complicit in the actions of the MQM. Counsel for each Party also made submissions to this Court with regards to the issue of complicity, which it will not be necessary for this Court to address, since the issue of complicity is irrelevant to a determination under paragraph 34(1)(f) of the Act, which refers strictly to the notion of membership in the organization.  
 The question of inadmissibility under paragraph 34(1)(f) should thus be distinguished from inadmissibility as a Convention refugee under section 98 of the Act, which relies on article 1F of the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, where the ground for inadmissibility is described as having "committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity" and, absent direct proof as to the involvement of the person in a specific crime, requires a finding of complicity with the organization who committed such crime. 
  [emphasis added] 
 
 
 
 55. A review of the record in this case confirms that the UNHCR considered the issue of Mr. Suleyman's potential exclusion under Article 1F of the Convention, concluding that he was not excluded as there was no indication that he had personally assisted in the commission of any of the crimes falling under Article 1F. 
 
 
 
 56. In contrast, the visa officer's finding that Mr. Suleyman was inadmissible under paragraph 34(1)(f) of  
 IRPA 
  was based upon his membership in the PKK. As was noted at the outset of the analysis, no issue has been taken with respect to the officer's membership finding. 
 
 
 
 57. As a consequence, I am not persuaded that there was any inconsistency between the findings of the UNHCR and the visa officer, or that the visa officer erred as alleged in this regard. 
 
