[4]
By letter dated August 26, 1998, Qi Wen Zhao was informed that her application for permanent residence had been rejected:
"This refers to your application for permanent residence in Canada.
"I have now completed the assessment of your application and in my opinion it would be contrary to the
Immigration Act
and the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
for you to be granted landing in Canada. I will, therefore, not be able to issue an immigrant visa to you.
"Your application has been refused as you are a member of the inadmissible class of persons described in paragraph 19(2)(d) of the
Immigration Act
in that you do not meet the requirements of paragraph 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
for the issuance of a visa.
"Regulation 2(1) stipulates 'adopted' means a person who is adopted in accordance with the laws of a province or of a country other than Canada or any political subdivision thereof, where the adoption creates a genuine relationship of parent and child, but does not include a person who is adopted for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada or gaining the admission to Canada of any of the person's relatives.
"You were adopted in 1994, when you were 10 years old, by your father's cousin and her husband. During your interview with a visa officer on 18 August 1998 you stated that you currently reside with your biological mother and father and are cared for and financially supported by them. You stated that you have always lived with your natural parents. You stated that you wanted to go to Canada to get a better education. Your sponsor immigrated to Canada in 1986 when you were only 2 years old and you stated that you did not see her again until 1994 when she returned to visit for one month and complete the adoption papers. You have not seen your sponsor since 1994 and you stated that correspondence is limited to cards at Christmas, New Years, and your birthday. You were unable to provide any information about your sponsor's life in Canada or where they live. Your parents are both employed and stated that there are no family problems which make them unable to care for you and your younger sisters.
"You have failed to satisfy me, through documents provided and information given at interview, that a genuine parent-child relationship exists between you and your sponsor. As you have always been under the care of your natural parents I must conclude that this adoption was undertaken for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada and you are therefore inadmissible under s. 19(2)(d) of the
Immigration Act
. ..."