[8]
The Board stated the following at page 1 of its decision:
"The visa officer found that there was insufficient evidence of the adoption having created a genuine parent and child relationship, in part, because the child continued to live with her biological parents, who are cousins of the appellant's wife Shu Zhueng Zhao. The visa officer also described that there was little personal contact between the appellant and the adopted child between 1986 when she was two years of age and 1994, when the adoption was commenced and the Applicant was 10 years of age. There were no personal visits after 1994 by the appellant or his wife, who the Applicant referred to as 'aunt' and 'uncle'. Also, there was little evidence of communication between the child and her adoptive parents subsequent to the adoption.
"Counsel for the appellant asserted that the visa officer applied the wrong statutory test in applying the definition of 'adopted' to the Applicant and finding her not to be a member of the family class. Further, counsel averred that the conclusion that the adoption was to gain the Applicant's admission to Canada flowed from the visa officer's determination that there was insufficient evidence of a genuine parent and child relationship. He asserts this was without evidence specific to the purpose of the adoption. Counsel for the appellant also asserts that the visa officer's failure to interview the adoptive parents regarding their motivation, which is a factor for consideration in determining the purpose of the adoption, is tantamount to a breach of natural justice.
"
I will not make a finding with regard to the errors asserted by appellant's counsel, as it is not determinative of this appeal. Since the Federal Court ruling in Kahlon, appeals before the Appeal Division are hearings de novo. Thus any deficiencies in the treatment or availability of evidence may be remedied at this proceeding. The onus is on the appellant to prove his case. Consequently I will analyze all the evidence and submissions in this case to arrive at a decision.
" (Emphasis added)