[28]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in failing to have regard to the purpose of the legislation when it determined that Qi Wen Zhao did not meet the definition of "adopted" under the
Regulations
. To aid in determining the purpose of the legislation, the applicant submits the
Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement
, C. Gaz. 1993.II.630. (the
RIAS
) which accompanied amendments to the
Regulations
concerning adopted children:
"Description
"These amendments remove the previous distinction between children adopted abroad and natural born children for the purposes of determining family membership. To reduce the potential of adoptions of convenience (adoptions undertaken for immigration purposes or for eventual sponsorship of the birth family), the amendments provide for adoptions undertaken in situations where the child is in need of parental care.
"In the past, adopted children were eligible for family class membership only if the adoption had taken place before the child had reached the age of thirteen. Similarly, an adopted child was eligible to be admitted as dependant accompanying an independent immigrant or a sponsored family class member if the child had been adopted before reaching the age of thirteen.
"These provisions prevented adoption in cases where the adopted child over thirteen years of age was genuinely in need of parental care. This concern has been raised by the Parliamentary Subcommittee on Equality, in its Report
Equality for All
. As well, several court actions have been initiated against the previous provisions alleging that they were discriminatory and contrary to the equality provision of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
In addition, the age barrier was not consistent with the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children
and did not reflect the negotiations on international adoption under the auspices of the
Hague Conference on Private International Law
.
"The amendments extend the eligibility of an adopted child for purposes of immigration to children under nineteen years of age, thus bringing the adoption provisions in line with the other immigration provisions dealing with sponsorship of children and dependency.
"The amendments also seek to address the potential for use of the adoption provisions to circumvent immigration requirements. The family relationship created by adoption would normally preclude the ability of the child to sponsor the birth family. To prevent the misuse of the adoption provisions for the purposes of immigration, regulations are amended to prohibit adoptions of convenience. These amendments are modelled on the marriage of convenience clause and permit an assessment of the authenticity of the adoption.
"Alternatives Considered
"Because of the potential for abuse, careful consideration was given to retaining the status quo. However, it was concluded that it was necessary to develop an approach which balances considerations of equality and fairness, concerns regarding the welfare of the child and the use of the family class provisions to circumvent immigration requirements."