[80]
The applicant submits that Canadian law is concerned only with the nature of the relationship after the child arrives in Canada, and that the relationship after the adoption but before the child immigrates to Canada is irrelevant. The applicant submits that the proper test is whether the relationship is so inchoate as to be non-existent as discussed in
Roy v. M.C.I.
, I.A.D., W99-00071, September 7, 2000, at page 4:
"[9] In this case, the appellant has consistently provided Lady Roxanne with financial support. That the appellant also supports other relatives does not diminish her support for Lady Roxanne. The evidence is that other relatives do not receive the same amount of money or with the same regularity as Lady Roxanne. The extended family system should not be used to negate a genuine adoption. Concerning ongoing communications, the panel notes that Lady Roxanne speaks Tagalog and cannot communicate with Kathleen or Daddy Roy in English. Her natural parents do not have a phone and have to travel outside their town to make phone calls. The mail system is not reliable in terms of the time it takes to deliver letters. Under the circumstances, the proof of contact, while not impressive, does not detract from the parent and child relationship established. The panel finds that the Roy family has consistently sought the welfare of Lady Roxanne and considered her to be part of the family. The appellant has taken care of her needs. She knows the size of her clothing and keeps abreast of her educational progress through the natural mother. Kathleen played with Lady Roxanne during her visit to the Philippines and looks forward to having a younger sister. Mr. Roy contemplated Lady Roxanne learning his native language, French. The whole family has planned for her arrival. The future plans of the family are relevant not because the test is prospective, but because the parent and child relationship is not static and the future plans impact on the genuineness of the adoption.
Thus, though the parent and child relationship may in some respects be inchoate or not fully formed it is not so inchoate as to be non-existent.
" (Emphasis added)
Minister's Submissions