 [25] 
  I have already made mention of the fact that having found "the Commission breached its duty of procedural fairness by not providing a thorough and neutral investigation ..." it was unnecessary for Heneghan, J., to comment on the other submissions in support of the application for judicial review. The actual language used by Heneghan, J., deserves repeating as she so aptly summarized the law. She said: 
 
 
 
 "70 In my opinion, not only does the failure to interview this witness constitute a serious deficiency in the investigation process but it is also a serious deficiency in the investigation reports which the Commission relied on in deciding to dismiss the Applicant's complaints. If the reports were defective, it follows that the Commission was not in possession of sufficient relevant information upon which it could properly exercise its discretion. 
 
 
 
 "71 The broad discretion vested in the Commission in respect of deciding whether to dismiss a complaint or refer it to adjudication before a tribunal does not allow it, in my opinion, to short-circuit the investigative process and ignore a necessary witness. Indeed, the failure to interview a person who is vitally connected to the alleged discriminatory action may lead to the inference of pre-judgment by the investigator. 
 
 
 
 "72 I find that the Commission failed in its obligation to conduct a thorough investigation when it failed to interview Dr. Vanier. 
 
 
 
 "73 Having found that the Commission breached its duty of procedural fairness by not providing a thorough and neutral investigation, it is unnecessary for me to comment on whether the Commission erred in law in making a finding that there was insufficient evidence to justify taking the complaints to the tribunal stage (in that regard see  
 Slattery 
 , supra, at page 606) or on any other submissions made by the Applicant." 
 
 
 
 The reference to  
 Slattery 
  is to  
 Slattery v. Canadian Human Rights Commission 
 , [1994] 2 F.C. 574; 73 F.T.R. 161 (T.D.). 
 
