 [28] 
  The report went on to recount that following Heneghan, J.'s, decision, Dr. Vanier was located and interviewed. The investigators simply say that he denied all allegations of discrimination cited by Dr. Grover in complaints H32471 and H32637. Details of the interview were conveyed to Dr. Grover for comment, and he actually provided a draft rebuttal. He requested a meeting but later changed his mind because of his concern about the overlap with the Ontario Superior Court action. He requested that the Commission place further investigation into all three complaints into abeyance pending the outcome of that litigation. The investigators noted that they were planning further interviews with respect to complaint H47999 when Dr. Grover made that request. They conducted no more interviews, but on the other hand, the Commission did not stay the complaints. As regards the request for a stay, the report states: 
 
 
 
 "28. The second matter in front of the Commission is the complainant's request to put his complaints in abeyance pending the decision of the Ontario Superior Court. Even though the complainant's request is understandable, one cannot assess it without weighing the impact such decision would have on all the involved parties. As mentioned by the complainant, his court action may avoid potential duplication since it touches on matters which are also part of his human rights complaints. This option would either resolve the complaints or, should he be dissatisfied with the court decision, allow the complainant to request a further investigation by the Commission. 
 
 
 
 "29. On the other hand, one cannot ignore that the allegations in these complaints are related to the same concern raised by the complainant since 1987; that the complaints involve the same individuals and management staff that appeared before the CHRT in 1992 and 1994; and, that the Human Rights Tribunal has already made findings of fact on the witnesses [sic] credibility and on many of the issues raised by the complainant. As such, it is unlikely that any further investigation would allow the Commission to render a proper decision because the incidents alleged in these complaints cannot be investigated in isolation from the first complaint and the Tribunal's subsequent decisions. Given this interconnectedness, it would be more appropriate to refer the 3 complaints to the Tribunal to conduct a full inquiry." 
