Students Federation v. NSERC, [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 256 (FC),
MLB unedited judgment
Canadian Federation of Students (applicant) v. Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (respondent)
(T-1336-06; 2010 FC 412)
Indexed As: Canadian Federation of Students v. Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
Cite As: [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 256
Federal Court
Parent, Assessment Officer
April 15, 2010.
Counsel:
N/A, for the applicant;
Talitha Nabbali and John Tyhurst, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Fewer & Company, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Parent, Assessment Officer
: On April 18, 2008, the Application pursuant to Section 18.1 of the
Federal Courts Act
for judicial review of a decision of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada was dismissed by the Court with costs to the respondent. Further to the reception of the respondent's Bill of Costs on January 14, 2010, a timetable for written disposition of its assessment was issued on February 16, 2010 and sent to both parties. While counsel for the respondent filed the necessary material to justify fees and disbursements within the prescribed timeframe, submissions in reply on behalf of the applicant were not received by the Registry of the Court in the allocated timeframe, nor was any request to extend the time to file said submissions received. The assessment of the respondent's Bill of Costs will therefore proceed despite its non-contestation.
[2]
In
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
In accordance with the above referenced comments and considering the lack of challenge by the opposing party, I am prepared to certify the items in the respondent's Bill of Costs which are not unlawful or outside the authority of the Court Judgment and the Tariff.
[3]
The fees claimed for preparation for an examination (Item 8), attendance on examination (Item 9), counsel fee for hearing (Item 14), services after judgment (Item 25) and assessment of costs (Item 26) are allowed as claimed. The respondent claimed eight Units under Item 13 for counsel fee preparation for hearing. This Item fee will be reduced to five Units considering the maximum allowable under Column III of Tariff B.
[4]
With regard to the disbursements claimed, they are supported by affidavit, not contested and considered charges necessary to the conduct of this matter. The amounts claimed are reasonable and allowed.
[5]
The respondent's bill of costs is allowed for a total amount of $7,101.12.
[End of document]
