 [16] 
  The applicants submit that the Officer stated the correct test but did not apply it. The applicants contend that the Officer erroneously applied the test applicable to a PRRA decision in the determination of the H&C application. While the risk in a PRRA decision must amount to a risk to life or of cruel and unusual punishment or torture, risk is assessed differently in an H&C application. In the context of the present case, the Officer must ask himself whether the risk factors amount to unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship. In  
 Ramirez v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2006 FC 1404, at paragraphs 42 and 45, [2006] F.C.J. No. 1763, Justice de Montigny outlines the test, and carefully reviews the case law on this point: 
 
 
 
 [42] It is beyond dispute that the concept of "hardship" in an H&C application and the "risk" contemplated in a PRRA are not equivalent and must be assessed according to a different standard. As explained by Chief Justice Allan Lutfy in  
 Pinter v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2005] F.C.J. No. 366, 2005 FC 296: 
 
 
 
 [3] In an application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration under section 25 of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
  (IRPA), the applicant's burden is to satisfy the decision-maker that there would be unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada. 
 
 
 
 [4] In a pre-removal risk assessment under sections 97, 112 and 113 of the IRPA, protection may be afforded to a person who, upon removal from Canada to their country of nationality, would be subject to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment. 
 
 
 
 [5] In my view, it was an error in law for the immigration officer to have concluded that she was not required to deal with risk factors in her assessment of the humanitarian and compassionate application. She should not have closed her mind to risk factors even though a valid negative pre-removal risk assessment may have been made.  
 There may well be risk considerations which are relevant to an application for permanent residence from within Canada which fall well below the higher threshold of risk to life or cruel and unusual punishment 
 . [Emphasis Added] 
 
 
 
 . . . 
 
 
 
 [45] While it may be that violence, harassment and the poor health and sanitary conditions may not amount to a personalized risk for the purposes of a PRRA application, these factors may well be sufficient to establish unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship. I would therefore adopt the following conclusion reached by Justice O'Keefe in  
 Dharamraj v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2006] F.C.J. No. 853, 2006 FC 674: 
 
 
 
 [24] There is no dispute that there is a higher burden on the applicants to establish risk for the purposes of a PRRA than there is for H&C purposes. Consequently, there may be circumstances where risk would be relevant for an H&C application but not for a PRRA application. 
 
 
 
 [25] In the present case, the officer merely adopted the assessment of risk made by the IRB and the PRRA officer without further analysis for the purpose of the H&C application. In my opinion, the officer made an unreasonable decision because she did not consider the risk factors in the context of the H&C application. 
 