[31]
In
Wanderingspirit et al. v. Marie et al.
(2003), 312 N.R. 385; 2003 FCA 385, the Federal Court of Appeal set out what should happen in cases such as the present where, strictly speaking, a decision of a band council is not being challenged but where the application seeks to challenge the right of a public office holder to hold office:
"18. Pursuant to paragraph 18(1)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
, the Federal Court has jurisdiction to issue a writ of quo warranto or to grant declaratory relief. I see no reason why declaratory relief which, in substance, is in the nature of quo warranto, cannot be granted. That procedure appears to have been approved in
Lake Babine Indian Band et al. v. Williams et al.
(1996), 194 N.R. 44 (F.C.A.). Robertson, J.A., states at paragraphs 3 and 4:
'3. It is to be noted at the outset that the appellants do not dispute the jurisdiction of the court to address the issues herein. The respondents seek declaratory and injunctive relief, which in these circumstances essentially amounts to a request for a writ of quo warranto. Quo warranto allows a challenge of an individual's right to hold a particular office ...
'4. There is no doubt therefore that there is jurisdiction per se, an Indian Band Council being a "federal board, commission or other tribunal" within the meaning of ss. 2 and 18 of the
Act
. ... Accordingly, this Court has jurisdiction to address the issue but it can do so only in the context of a s. 18 application not in the context of an action initiated by way of statement of claim.'
"19. In the present case, the matter proceeded by way of application and the objection in
Lake Babine
to the procedure by way of statement of claim is not relevant.
"20. While normally judicial review is conducted with respect to a decision of a federal board, commission or tribunal, there will be occasions where relief may be granted in the absence of a decision. An application for a writ of prohibition is an obvious example. Quo warranto or a declaration in the nature of quo warranto where the challenge is to the right of a public office holder to hold office directly is another. That is what has occurred here. For these reasons, the second ground of appeal must be rejected."