[79]
The plebiscite regulations in
Camsell
provided that the provisions of the
Municipal
Act
applied to the vote, "with such modifications as the circumstances require[d]" (paragraph 6). Justice Marshall noted that two of the irregularities resulted from the Returning Officer applying such modifications due to the limited time available in preparing for the vote. He then reviewed the applicable authorities, noting that elections "should not be too easily overturned," and noting that irregularities will virtually always occur in an election in one form or another (paragraph 52). He then summarized the law in this way at paragraph 55:
"So the rule then, on a review of these authorities and subject to statutory modification, could be stated, in my view as follows: That the vote should be vitiated, only if it is shown that there were such irregularities that, on a balance of probabilities, the result of the election might have been different. And, secondly, that the vote could not be said to have been a vote, that is, that it was not conducted generally in accordance with electoral practice under existing statutes."
Justice Marshall held that the election in
Camsell
was conducted generally in accordance with the principles for conducting such an election. He also held that the petitioners had failed to establish, on a balance of probabilities, that because of the irregularities which occurred, there might have been a different result. His reasoning with respect to the non-initialling of ballots, particularly relevant in the present circumstances, was as follows, at paragraph 27:
"The petitioners tendered evidence that none of the ballots were initialled, as required by s. 51(j) of the
Municipal
Act
, and, therefore, they contend that under a strict interpretation of that
Act
, again none of the ballots should count. The purpose of the process is to ensure that the ballots are legitimate. The requirement, in my view, is directive, not mandatory. There is considerable authority for this interpretation [Footnote: See
Blackburn v. Moss
(1986), 12 O.A.C. 387 (Div. Ct.), and
Morgan v. Simpson
, [1974] 3 All E.R. 722 at 725 (C.A.)]. Again, in this regard, there was no evidence that the practice had led to any impropriety in the casting or recording of the vote, which might otherwise have changed the vote."
Justice Marshall added at paragraph 63 that "... [w]ith regard to the failure to initial the ballots, there is not a shred of evidence that this affected the result in any way." Justice Marshall concluded that, as there was no evidence that the irregularities affected the result of the vote, the petition should be dismissed and the election upheld.