[8]
A second issue was raised by the respondent. The respondent
submits that I should dismiss the applicant's application for judicial review "on the ground that the applicant has an adequate alternate remedy, namely redress of grievance to the Chief of Defence Staff and ultimately to the Minister of National Defence". In support of his
submission, the respondent refers to s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
and art. 19.26 and 19.27 of the
Queen's Regulations and Orders
("
Q.R.&O.
"), which provide as follows:
"
National Defence Act
:
"29. Except in respect of a matter that would properly be the subject of an appeal or petition under Part IX or an application or appeal under Part IX.1, an officer or noncommissioned member who considers that he has suffered any personal oppression, injustice or other ill-treatment or that he has any other cause for grievance may as a matter of right seek redress from such superior authorities in such manner and under such conditions as shall be prescribed in regulations made by the Governor-in-Council.
"
Queen's Regulations and Orders
:
"
19.26 - REDRESS OF GRIEVANCE
"(1) In this article, 'redress authority' means a commanding officer, an officer commanding a formation or command, the Chief of Defence Staff or the Minister.
"(2) Subject to paragraph (12), a complaint under this article shall be submitted through the chain of command.
"(3) Every redress authority to whom a complaint is submitted under this article shall cause it to be investigated as expeditiously as possible.
. . . . .
"
19.27 - RULES FOR STATING GRIEVANCES
"(1) A complaint in writing submitted by an officer of noncommissioned member under article 19.26 (Redress of Grievance) shall contain:
(a) a statement of the facts of the situation giving rise to the complaint;
(b) a statement of the redress sought;
(c) a written statement from any individual upon whom the member is relying to substantiate the complaint; and
(d) a copy of any document upon which the member is relying to substantiate the complaint.
"(2) A complaint in writing shall not be considered by a redress authority where the complaint:
(a) is made jointly by two or more officers or noncommissioned members;
(b) is made anonymously;
(c) contains a statement known to the officer or noncommissioned member to be untrue; or
(d) includes language or comments that are insubordinate or subversive of discipline, except to the extent that may be necessary for an adequate statement of the complaint.
"(3) Where a complainant requests assistance in the preparation of a complaint, the commanding officer shall detail an officer or noncommissioned member to assist in its preparation.
"(4) Where practical, a commanding officer shall detail under paragraph (3) an officer or noncommissioned member chosen by the complainant."