[2]
These applications arise from an order of Strayer, J., made on May 24, 1994, in file T-1946-93, wherein he dismissed Novopharm's application to strike the originating notice of motion. In the course of his reasons, Strayer, J., invited Novopharm to bring forth the present motions in the following terms:
"(...) That is, Novopharm now argues that Eli Lilly's patents on the patent list in question do not contain claims for the medicine itself nor for the use of the medicine. However, in its notice of allegations concerning these patents Novopharm simply put an 'x' beside the ground stated in the form as follows:
'No claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by that person of the drug for which the submission for the notice of compliance is filed.'
"It's extremely brief 'statement of legal and factual basis' in respect to each patent was to the effect that the process used by Novopharm does not involve the use of the process claimed in the particular patent in question. In other words it appears from the notice of allegations that Novopharm is denying infringement of the process claims in Eli Lilly's patents because Novopharm's processes are different. Now Novopharm argues as the basis of its motion to strike that there is no infringement because Eli Lilly's patents contain no claims for the medicine itself nor for the use of the medicine: they contain only process claims. This is a significantly different issue. It is true that Eli Lilly has had some time to file evidence to refute this line of argument which commenced to be asserted by Novopharm some weeks after Lilly's originating notice of motion was filed. I am however unwilling to say at this point that Lilly has failed to confront in a timely fashion the evidence put forward by Novopharm.
"Indeed it appears to me that for Novopharm to attack Lilly's originating notice of motion in this fashion it must first amend its notice of allegations. While there is jurisprudence in this court seriously questioning the right of second persons to file new notices of allegations in a unilateral fashion, it would appear to me open to a second person to apply for leave to amend its notice of allegation and the court would then have to consider whether such an amendment could be allowed, and on what terms, in order to prevent prejudice to the other party."