[63]
With respect to the award for legal costs, the decision at p. 28 reads:
"The issue has been canvassed at length in numerous decisions, mainly in
Banca Nazionale Del Lavoro of Canada Ltd. v. Lee-Shanok
(1988), 22 C.C.E.L. 59 (F.C.A.), where the Federal Court of Appeal expressed some reservation about awarding costs other than party-and-party costs. The issue was also reviewed in
Cote v. Dicom Corporation
, Feb. 1987 (Sabouring), filed by counsel for the employer.
"The complainant is in a dire financial situation and there is no doubt that it is equitable under s. 242(4)(c) to [award her] reasonable compensation for her legal costs.
"This case lasted two days and even though the overall costs she claims may not appear unreasonable per se, I would allow a lump sum of $2,500 towards the complainant's legal fees. This amount is to cover the attendance as well as her counsel's preparation.
"Further, expenses amounting to $433.64 were charged to the complainant by her counsel and she is entitled to be paid back of these expenses. This comes to a total sum of $2,733.64 for legal costs to which she is entitled."
The essence of this award seems to be that, considering the respondent's dire financial circumstances, an award of costs would be equitable in order to remedy the damage caused by her former employer. The adjudicator cited
Banca
, supra in support of this award. The relevant excerpt from the decision of Stone, J.A., in
Banca
is found at p. 77 [C.C.E.L.]:
"I have no difficulty in reading it [paragraph 242(4)(c)], with its broad reference to granting relief that is 'equitable to require the employer to do in order to remedy or counteract any consequence of the dismissal,' as including the power to award costs. The difficulty I have is in viewing an award of compensation, gained at some considerable expense to a complainant in terms of legal costs, as having the effect of making him whole. Legal costs incurred would effectively reduce compensation for lost remuneration, while their allowance would appear to remedy or, at least, to counteract a consequence of the dismissal. I am not persuaded by the applicant's contention that para. (c) does not permit an award of costs because the only pecuniary award contemplated by Parliament is compensation as provided for in para. (a)."