 [21] 
  THE RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
 
 
 
 Canadian Human Rights Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 
 
 
 
 "2. The purpose of this Act is to extend the laws in Canada to give effect, within the purview of matters coming within the legislative authority of Parliament, to the principle that all individuals should have an opportunity equal with other individuals to make for themselves the lives that they are able and wish to have and to have their needs accommodated, consistent with their duties and obligations as members of society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so by discriminatory practices based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, disability or conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted. 
 
 
 
 "3(1) For all purposes of this Act, the prohibited grounds of discrimination are race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, disability and conviction for which a pardon has been granted. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "7. It is a discriminatory practice, directly or indirectly, 
 
 
 
 (a) to refuse to employ or continue to employ any individual, or 
 
 
 
 (b) in the course of employment, to differentiate adversely in relation to an employee, 
 
 
 
 on a prohibited ground of discrimination. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "10. It is a discriminatory practice for an employer, employee organization or employer organization 
 
 
 
 (a) to establish or pursue a policy or practice, or 
 
 
 
 (b) to enter into an agreement affecting recruitment, referral, hiring, promotion, training, apprenticeship, transfer or any other matter relating to employment or prospective employment, 
 
 
 
 that deprives or tends to deprive an individual or class of individuals of any employment opportunities on a prohibited ground of discrimination. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "41(1) Subject to section 40, the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint it appears to the Commission that 
 
 
 
 (a) the alleged victim of the discriminatory practice to which the complaint relates ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available; 
 
 
 
 (b) the complaint is one that could more appropriately be dealt with, initially or completely, according to a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act; 
 
 
 
 (c) the complaint is beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission; 
 
 
 
 (d) the complaint is trivial, frivolous, vexatious or made in bad faith; or 
 
 
 
 (e) the complaint is based on acts or omissions the last of which occurred more than one year, or such longer period of time as the Commission considers appropriate in the circumstances, before receipt of the complaint. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "43(1) The Commission may designate a person, in this Part referred to as an 'investigator', to investigate a complaint. 
 
 
 
 "(2) An investigator shall investigate a complaint in a manner authorized by regulations made pursuant to subsection (4). 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(3) No person shall obstruct an investigator in the investigation of a complaint. 
 
 
 
 "(4) The Governor in Council may make regulations 
 
 
 
 (a) prescribing procedures to be followed by investigators; 
 
 
 
 (b) authorizing the manner in which complaints are to be investigated pursuant to this Part; and 
 
 
 
 (c) prescribing limitations for the purpose of subsection (2.1). 
 
 
 
 "44(1) An investigator shall, as soon as possible after the conclusion of an investigation, submit to the Commission a report of the findings of the investigation. 
 
 
 
 "(2) If, on receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission is satisfied 
 
 
 
 (a) that the complainant ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available, or 
 
 
 
 (b) that the complaint could more appropriately be dealt with, initially or completely, by means of a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act, 
 
 
 
 it shall refer the complainant to the appropriate authority. 
 
 
 
 "(3) On receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission 
 
 
 
 (a) may request the Chairperson of the Tribunal to institute an inquiry under section 49 into the complaint to which the report relates if the Commission is satisfied 
 
 
 
 (i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted, and 
 
 
 
 (ii) that the complaint to which the report relates should not be referred pursuant to subsection (2) or dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e); or 
 
 
 
 (b) shall dismiss the complaint to which the report relates if it is satisfied 
 
 
 
 (i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is not warranted, or 
 
 
 
 (ii) that the complaint should be dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e). 
 
 
 
 "(4) After receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission 
 
 
 
 (a) shall notify in writing the complainant and the person against whom the complaint was made of its action under subsection (2) or (3); and 
 
 
 
 (b) may, in such manner as it sees fit, notify any other person whom it considers necessary to notify of its action under subsection (2) or (3)." 
 
 