[10]
The standard of sufficiency of proof upon an application for an order requiring an alleged contemnor to show cause why he, she or it, ought not to be found in contempt is described in two passages of reasons of Mr. Justice Lacombe, writing for the majority in the Appeal Division of this court in Canada Post Corporation et al. v. CUPW and A.G. Canada, [1987] 3 F.C. 654; 82 N.R. 249. This was an appeal from a judgment of the Trial Division in which one judge dismissed an application to rescind a show cause order, made ex parte by another judge directing the appellants in the Appeal Division to appear in the Trial Division to answer a charge of contempt of court. Lacombe, J., with Hugessen, J., concurring, found that certain individual "accuseds" ought not to have been charged, but that the postal corporation had been correctly so charged. At p. 670 F.C., Lacombe, J., is reported thus:
"... A judge has no discretion to grant or deny an application for a show cause order made under rule 355(4). He must make the order as required by the law, the evidence and the pleadings, and in the event of error his decision can be appealed to this court: R. v. Perry, [1982] 2 F.C. 519; (1982), 133 D.L.R.(3d) 703 (C.A.)."
Again, at pp. 672 and 673, the learned judge is reported as follows:
"It follows from all of this, to return to the facts of the case at bar, that the appellants Cooke, Boyer, Dubuc and Lamarche were strictly entitled to be discharged in the preliminary stages of the contempt of court proceeding brought against them by the respondent. To do this, they only needed to show its fundamental defect, namely the total absence of evidence against them in the affidavits submitted in support of the proceeding. The trial judge should have rescinded their summons, as he was not asked to substitute his view of the evidence for that of the judge who had made the ex parte order. What he was actually required to do was to rule that such evidence did not exist, and that therefore their summons for contempt of court was invalid.
"The trial judge equally could not refuse to grant their application to rescind on the further ground that, in any case, they would have an opportunity to challenge the respondent's evidence at the later stage of the hearing on the merits of its application for contempt of court. For such a reasoning to be valid, once again the affidavit or affidavits filed in support of an application for a show cause order must contain some evidence that the contempt of court alleged in the application was committed. Though the latter is similar to an information, and the order is only a simple summons, it is still well established that a valid summons cannot be based on a defective information. The appellants Cooke, Boyer, Dubuc and Lamarche did not have to await their appearance on a defective summons to challenge in court evidence which the respondent had not presented when it was issued. They were entitled in raising this peremptory argument in their application to rescind, to have the order made against them ex parte lifted immediately in limine."
The last of the selected passages from CUPW v. Canada Post Corp. is that in which Lacombe, J., is reported still in [1987] 3 F.C., now at p. 674:
"... A specific material fact which affected the appellant in some way, if not directly, had been established in the affidavits of the postal workers submitted in support of the respondent's application: the prohibition contained in the arbitral award had not been observed in three of its establishments. There was accordingly prima facie evidence that the arbitral award had been disobeyed, and this was submitted to the judge making the show cause order for his consideration. This evidence was clear enough to allow him, in view of the allegations of the respondent's application, to tie it to the personal responsibility of the appellant and to justify him in summoning the latter to appear and eventually answer to the court on the matter. It is at the later stage, at the hearing on the merits, that the appellant will be able to present its defence arguments in an effort to avoid liability, possibly including the one now being made in its appeal. On an application for a show cause order, a judge needs only to be satisfied that the evidence contained in the affidavits filed in support of the application is sufficient to authorize the making of the order: Baxter Travenol Laboratories Inc. v. Cutter (Canada) Ltd. (1985), 56 N.R. 282 (F.C.A.), at p. 288."