[13]
Mr. McDermid's affidavit is brief and, keeping in mind that Mr. Justice Rouleau issued the interlocutory injunction sometime during January 12, 1989, it will be convenient to recite that affidavit in full here:
"1. I am a product buyer for Brathwaites Ltd. of Winnipeg, Manitoba, a company whose business includes the wholesale of prescription drugs to pharmacists and hospitals.
"2. On Friday, January 13, 1989, I received a telephone call from an individual named Paul Phaneuf who is the Apotex Inc. (hereinafter 'Apotex') salesman for the Winnipeg area. Mr. Phaneuf advised me and I verily believe the following. I was advised that a court injunction prevented Apotex from selling atenolol directly to the retail trade. Mr. Phaneuf suggested that Brathwaites Ltd. purchase a specific quantity of atenolol tablets and offered favourable terms if I would approve the purchase.
"3. Under the circumstances, I immediately spoke with Mr. Arthur U. Chipman, the President of Brathwaites Ltd. I was advised by Mr. Chipman not to confirm with Apotex our willingness to buy the atenolol until Mr. Chipman could obtain more information regarding the legal proceedings.
"4. In the afternoon on January 13, 1989, Mr. Phaneuf called me by telephone once again and advised me, and I verily believe, that a mistake had been made at his end and the atenolol tablets had been shipped and were en route to Brathwaites Ltd.
"5. Still later in the afternoon on January 13, 1989, Brathwaites Ltd. received at its loading dock $48,194.65 worth of Apotex brand of atenolol tablets.
"6. I am advised by Mr. Chipman and verily believe the following. On January 13 or 16, 1989, Mr. Chipman spoke by telephone with the Apotex office in Toronto and in particular with Michael Weingarten the Apotex regional sales manager. Mr. Weingarten advised Mr. Chipman that Brathwaites Ltd. could sell the Apotex brand of atenolol and that an appeal of the court decision was pending. Mr. Weingarten also advised that Brathwaites could return the atenolol to Apotex if it wished to do so.
"7. Attached hereto as Exhibit 'A' is a copy of the invoice received from Apotex in connection with the aforesaid shipment of atenolol. The Exhibit A invoice appears to have been backdated to January 12, 1989."
In oral argument, the plaintiffs' counsel acknowledged that the deponent's last sentence about backdating is not factual but merely unsupported speculation. Indeed it is, and prejudicial speculation, at that.