[15]
According to the deponent, that certain Paul Phaneuf "is the Apotex salesman for the Winnipeg area". Is Mr. Phaneuf an employed salesman or an independent commission salesman? The deponent does not say which. Is Mr. Phaneuf one who binds Apotex by his words and deeds? That is not known. Was Mr. Phaneuf authorized by Apotex to breach the injunction? That certainly is not known. What is known is that sometime on the day after the injunction was issued in Ottawa, Mr. Phaneuf in Winnipeg evinced an imperfect grasp, if not serious ignorance of its terms in advising Mr. McDermid that it "prevented Apotex from selling atenolol directly to the retail trade", if indeed Mr. Phaneuf did utter the words, which do not purport to be quoted directly. It was only "in the afternoon" that Mr. Phaneuf telephoned to say "that a mistake had been made at his end and the atenolol tablets
had been shipped
and were
en route
to Brathwaites Ltd." Such advice does nothing to contradict the "Jan. 12/89" date on the invoice. Still later that afternoon the shipment described in the invoice actually arrived. All of the foregoing puts utterly no sinister aura about Mr. Weingarten's advice that "Brathwaites could sell the Apotex brand of atenolol", if true, albeit double hearsay, and in fact, in offering to take back the shipment, Mr. Weingarten evinced no willful or contumacious attitude or conduct in regard to the court's injunction. If such were Mr. Weingarten's advice on January 16, after he would have had time to discover the simple terms of the injunction and obtain a solicitor's advice thereupon, it might well have been quite a different matter. However if the conversation took place on January 13, and Mr. McDermid gives that also as the date of that conversation between Messrs. Chipman and Weingarten, the law's tenacious presumption of innocence impels the court to regard Mr. Weingarten's ignorance as no more sinister than Mr. Phaneuf's. Mr. Weingarten's offer to retrieve the shipment from Brathwaites is the salient factor here.