[5]
In any event, it is clear that Mr. Rai found his way back into Canada, either in the way he described, or shortly after the execution of the deportation order in some other way. On February 2, 1984, he made application through his solicitor for consideration by the Minister's Review Committee under the long-term illegal migrant programme. That application was acknowledged by correspondance from Mr. G. Labelle, Secretary to the Review Committee dated May 14, 1984, in which Mr. Copeland was advised that approval had been given in principle and that Mr. Rai should report to the nearest Canada Immigration Centre for verification to see whether permanent residence could be granted. That was followed by correspondence October 15th from the Committee to Mr. Copeland, the significant portion of which is as follows:
"This is further to our letter of May 14, 1984 concerning your client, Mr. Sukhdev Singh Rai, who applied anonymously through you for consideration by the Minister's Review Committee on long-term Illegal Migrants and was approved in principle.
"The Committee re-considered this case, based on new information submitted by the Canada Immigration Centre, Toronto Central and it was determined that your client is not eligible as he is unable to prove that he complies with the five-year residency requirement. Although your client claimed that he left the aircraft in Calgary prior to his removal from Canada on July 11, 1980, there is no satisfactory evidence of this action. Therefore, it is the Committee's view that he was in fact removed from Canada and subsequently returned sometime prior to March 1981.
"Your client's situation is being examined by Commission officials to determine whether there are sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to warrant special consideration. You will be hearing from Commission officials in due course with respect to their review of Mr. Rai's case.
"I regret that the circumstances, as later developed, necessitated a reversal of the Committee's position."
Mr. Copeland wrote further letters of October 23 and November 22, 1984, seeking a reconsideration of the decision. The reply to those requests was correspondence of J.R. Gordon, Acting Secretary of the Review Committee to Mr. Copeland dated January 3, 1985, which reads as follows:
. . . . .
"As you are aware the Minister's Review Committee on long-term Illegal Migrants determined that Mr. Rai was not eligible for consideration as he did not comply with the five year residency rule. He was ordered deported and removed from Canada on July 11, 1980. He subsequently returned to Canada, without the Minister's consent I might add, sometime prior to March 1981.
"It is your contention that Mr. Rai left the aircraft in Calgary prior to his removal from Canada on July 11, 1980 and therefore he is eligible for consideration under the long-term Illegal Migrants Program. The evidence seen to date supporting this does not lend credence to this contention. Mr. Rai has been unable to provide any concrete proof of employment in Canada for the period July 1980 to March 1981 but does have it for the period prior to his removal and for the period after March 1981. In the circumstances it is strongly suspected that Mr. Rai was removed from Canada in July 1980 and returned sometime between July 1980 and March 1981.
"I should also emphasize that deportation procedures are strictly adhered to by our immigration officials. In the case of Calgary, for example, when a person has been ordered deported he is escorted by two officers from the detention centre to the airport. At the airport he is escorted by the two officers through security to the gate. At the gate the escort officers remain with the deport until the pre-board announcement is made. At the time of pre-boarding the deport is escorted onto the plane by the officers and the airline personnel involved sign for the passenger. The officers then remain outside the aircraft on the ramp until the door to the aircraft is closed, and then remain at the gate until the aircraft is pushed out, and the vehicle departs. At no time during this procedure do the officers leave the area until the aircraft has left the terminal. The story that Mr. Rai left the aircraft before departure to retrieve a suitcase is really quite unbelievable with such strict deportation procedures in effect.
"The other evidence presented by you also does not clarify Mr. Rai's situation. The prescription dated December 16, 1980 does not prove anything as Mr. Rai may well have returned before this date; the letter addressed to Mr. Rai dated July 22, 1980 also does not establish anything as the person in India had no way of knowing Mr. Rai was deported on July 11, 1980 and in all probability Mr. Rai never returned to India from Frankfurt. The final piece of evidence from Joginder Jagpal can only be considered self-serving. No mention was ever made in Mr. Rai's submission that he ever worked there until after the case was originally seen by the Review Committee. In this original submission Mr. Rai stated he worked from 1980 to 1981 for a phone manufacturing company in Toronto, but he was unable to provide evidence of this.
"Taking into account all the above information I must confirm that Mr. Rai is not eligible to be considered under the long-term Illegal Migrants Program. I regret that my reply cannot be more favourable."