 [9] 
  In her decision, the Officer expressed the opinion that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds for approving the exemption request. The principal reasons for this conclusion were set out as follows in her decision: 
 
 
 
 The applicant is seeking an exemption from the in-Canada selection criteria based on humanitarian and compassionate or public policy considerations to facilitate processing of the applicant for permanent residence from within Canada. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the decision-maker that her personal circumstances are such that the hardship of having to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada in the normal manner would be i) unusual and undeserving or ii) disproportionate. 
 
 
 
 The applicant's humanitarian and compassionate grounds are based on: 
 
 
 
 The client's close personal relationships with her "sponsor" and her "sponsor's" child, i.e. the people whom she considers to be her family, would create hardship if severed. 
 
 
 
 Family or personal relationship 
 
 
 
 The client has developed a co-dependent relationship with her "sponsor", whom she states she has been friends with since her return from Mexico in the summer of 2006. The client and "sponsor" have both stated that there is no conjugal relationship taking place. The client states that they are a family and need to remain together as they rely on each other financially and emotionally, however, they do not meet the definition of family class. While I do appreciate the closeness of this relationship, it appears that it is the "sponsor" who will suffer more from the separation, especially financially, since the client has been the sole breadwinner. If the client were to leave Canada, the "sponsor" would have to find other means to support herself and her child. I am not satisfied that a return home to Mexico would constitute an unusual and undeserving, or disproportionate hardship for the client that justifies an exemption under humanitarian and compassionate considerations. 
 
 
 
 Degree of Establishment 
 
 
 
 With respect to the client's ties and degree of establishment in Canada since her arrival in September 2005, she has provided evidence that she has been gainfully employed for almost one year when she went on Maternity Leave. I find that the client has not established that severing this tie would have such a significant negative impact that would constitute as [ 
 sic 
 ] unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship. 
 
 
 
 Best Interests of the Children 
 
 
 
 With respect to the best interests of the children involved, I recognize that there will be some adverse affects [ 
 sic 
 ] from the separation of the client and her "sponsor's" child that she stated she has been co-parenting for almost one year now. The child does, however, have a father living in the area that she does see, although not regularly according to the "sponsor's" statement. 
 
 
 
 There was no suggestion or evidence provided to support a claim concerning adverse affects to the client's newborn baby, should they return to Mexico. There has been no evidence of the father requesting access for visitation or custody, nor is he providing any financial support for this child. There have been no medical impediments identified that would prevent a return to Mexico by the client and/or her child. 
 
 
 
 I have considered the best interests of both children involved in this file and find that the client has not established that resettling back to her home country would have a significant negative impact on the children that would amount to an unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship. 
 
 
 
 Return to Mexico 
 
 
 
 I recognize that returning to Mexico will be difficult for the client and that her options for immigration to Canada may be limited, however, it is feasible. The client does have a valid Mexican passport and there is no evidence to indicate that a new passport would not be obtained for her child. She does still have family in Mexico and has not been away so long that she would not be able to reintegrate into her previous environment. However, the fact that the client would not likely qualify under the family class and may have difficulty qualifying in the economic class is not an unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship. This is a situation faced by many in similar situations. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 I have considered all information regarding this application as a whole. Having reviewed and considered the grounds the client has forward [ 
 sic 
 ] as grounds for an exemption, I am not of the opinion that they constitute as [ 
 sic 
 ] unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship. Therefore, I am not satisfied that sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds exist to approve this exemption request. 
 
 
 
 The application is refused. 
 
 
 
 Name of Decision Maker: Janice Gallant 
 
 
 
 CIC Halifax 
 
 
 