 [20] 
  I now turn to the third ground of this application, the alleged failure to provide the applicant further opportunity to respond to the Officer's concerns. In  
 Kaur v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2010 FC 442 this Court held that there is no obligation on a visa officer making an assessment of a skilled worker application to clarify evidence or provide an opportunity to rebut unsatisfactory evidence, especially when determining whether the evidence of the applicant meets the requirements of the  
 IRPA 
 . In  
 Kaur 
 , the applicant for permanent residence came from India. She applied as a skilled worker as a cook but did not provide sufficiently clear evidence of her duties and experience. She claimed, as does the applicant herein, that the visa officer had an obligation to provide her an opportunity to respond and provide further evidence if he was not satisfied with her documentation. This Court held: 
 
 
 
 The Applicant bears, and failed to discharge, the onus of submitting sufficient evidence in support of her application. Fairness did not require the visa officer to advise the Applicant of the inadequacy of her materials. The Applicant was not entitled to an interview to correct her own failings. 
 
 
 
 I agree with the Minister. The Applicant failed to discharge her burden to present adequate evidence in support of her obligation, and the visa officer had no duty to assist her in doing so. As Justice Marshall Rothstein, then of the Federal Court, Trial Division, held in  
 Lam v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [1998] F.C.J. No. 1239 (F.C.T.D.) at par. 3-4, the argument that an applicant might present prima facie evidence which, though insufficient to support his or her application will nevertheless trigger a duty to seek clarifications of this evidence: 
 
 
 
 gives an advantage to applicants for permanent residence who file ambiguous applications. This cannot be correct. 
 
 
 
 A visa officer may inquire further if he or she considers a further enquiry is warranted. Obviously, a visa officer cannot be wilfully blind in assessing an application and must act in good faith. However, there is no general obligation on a visa officer to make further inquiries when an application is ambiguous. The onus is on an applicant to file a clear application together with such supporting documentation as he or she considers advisable. The onus does not shift to the visa officer and there is no entitlement to a personal interview if the application is ambiguous or supporting material is not included.