 [28] 
  As the respondent relied on policy guidelines in justifying its decision, I shall reproduce the relevant portions from the Veterans Affairs Table of Disabilities, Chapter 9, Ears and Hearing: 
 
 
 
 9.01 - Hearing loss Entitlement 
 
 
 
 General 
 
 
 
 "A clinical audiologist's diagnosis or opinion concerning the type of hearing loss (e. g. noise- induced, presbycusis, conductive, etc.) will be considered by departmental adjudicators. The Department will not consider a diagnosis or opinion proclaimed by any one other than a physician or clinical audiologist. 
 
 
 
 "For sensorineural hearing loss claims, in making the determination that the pattern of hearing loss is noise- induced, adjudicators will consider decibel losses at all frequencies, including the 4000, 6000 and 8000 hertz frequencies. 
 
 
 
 "A disability is established: 
 
 
 
 (i) when the Pure Tone Average (PTA)1 over the 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 hertz frequencies is 25 decibels or more for either ear; 
 
 
 
 or 
 
 
 
 (ii) when the above criteria is not met, and there is a loss of 50 decibels or more at the 4000 hertz frequency in both ears. 
 
 
 
 "Once a disability is established, the type of hearing loss and its relationship to service must be determined. 
 
 
 
 "Generally, entitlement will be awarded for bilateral hearing loss unless there is compelling evidence of disability in one ear only that is attributable or directly connected to service. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 " 
 Noise- induced hearing loss claims under subsection 21( 2) of the Pension Act 
 : 
 
 
 
 "Where there is no audiogram during service or on release, it should be demonstrated medically that the current loss is, in fact, a noise-induced one. This determination should be made by a departmental adjudicator who has examined the result of a current audiometric test and has been given the factual history of the applicant. The adjudicator will also consider any other medical evidence on file. 
 
 
 
 "The evidence should show that the loss arose out of, was directly connected with or was aggravated by service (e. g. significant service-related noise exposure that seems reasonably to be the cause of the current disability). 
 
 
 
 "In cases where there is an audiogram on release and it shows a noise- induced hearing loss, full entitlement may be considered: 
 
 
 
 (i) if there is evidence of significant service-related noise exposure; and 
 
 
 
 (ii) there is no evidence of pre- enlistment hearing loss or of other contributing factors (e. g. an audiogram showing post-discharge deterioration, medical opinions to the effect that age or non-service noise exposure are factors, etc.). 
 
 
 
 "Partial entitlement may be considered if there is evidence of pre-enlistment hearing loss or of other contributing factors (e. g. an audiogram showing post-discharge deterioration, medical opinions to the effect that age or non- service noise exposure are factors, etc.). 
 
 
 
 "If the audiogram on release from service does not meet the requirements for hearing loss disability, any hearing loss demonstrated on subsequent audiograms is not considered due to service-related noise exposure and therefore, pension entitlement is not normally awarded. 
 
 
 
 "In any event, each individual case should be considered on its own merits." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 