 [10] 
  The Officer's concludes that he is not satisfied that the circumstances of the case are such that the applicants should be granted an exception from the usual requirements of the Act. The conclusion is premised on the following reasons: 
 
 
 
 a) The Officer finds that the applicants settled and adapted as well as might be expected for a family who has been in Canada for five and a half years. He notes that the two adult children work part-time and go to school, the principal applicant is working and Ms. Kaur provides childcare to a member of the community. He notes some ties to the community as shown by the supporting documentation. 
 
 
 
 b) The Officer finds that the hardships now in view were not unforeseeable in the normal working of the Act, and they were within the control of the applicants. The Officer notes that the applicants were, or could have been, aware of the process they were entering into in Canada. By prolonging their stay, as a result of the ordinary working of the Act, the applicants would have been aware of the hardships and disappointments which might follow a negative decision. The Officer concludes that he is not satisfied that the consequences of their removal would be disproportionate, and that the family could return to Kenya and continue to prosper in reasonable safety. 
 
 
 
 c) The Officer writes that the applicants' key submission is that they face risk upon return, which might not meet the threshold required to obtain refugee protection, but which could nevertheless constitute hardship. The Officer determines that the evidence does not support the allegation of risk. Rather, he points to the fact that Kenya is a poor country with significant disparity between the rich and the poor. The evidence shows high crimes rates, and a generalized risk of crime, particularly in areas dominated by Mungiki and other organized crime groups. The Officer finds that Kenya has been unique among East African countries in valuing its South Asian minorities, who may be resented in some circles, but are generally well established through political, business and social ties. 
 
 
 
 d) The Officer finds that state protection is not so deficient as to make wealth, and the risk of being a target of criminal activity, a hardship in and of itself. The Officer notes that Kenya is a democracy, and that the reformist government in place had made real efforts to improve law enforcement and the rule of law. In particular the Officer finds that part of the reformist agenda is to bring Mungiki under control, and that the police and state shows no inclination to collude with organized crime. 
 
 