[100]
This conclusion is justified by Prothonotary Milczynski in her view of the evidence:
"In this case, I accept Novopharm's argument that there is a public interest in protecting the propriety and commercially sensitive information of generic drug manufacturers and the information that they may disclose in proceedings under the
Regulations
. This interest does not, however, give rise to a blanket confidentiality order. Other than providing a list of the information ordered to be disclosed from the ANDS pursuant to s. 6(7) of the
Regulations
, however, Novopharm did not provide the Court with evidence relating what the information or documents were, and why in every case they ought to be confidential and kept from public access. The evidence was general and vague, and indeed, some of the information sought to be made subject to a confidentiality order appeared to be already accessible and available in the public domain. There were simply assertions that everything in the documents and information was confidential because Novopharm regarded them as confidential, and because the context of their submission and this proceeding required they be kept secret in their entirety so as not go give competitors any unfair advantage. There was no evidence substantiating these assertions, only speculation. In this respect, I prefer the Applicants' evidence, namely the two affidavits of Dr. Bert Liston, a former Assistant Deputy Minister of Health for Canada responsible for the Health Protection Branch, and in particular, the following point: that where an ANDS has been submitted, the mere fact of its filing is confidential, consequently confidentiality is appropriately applied to the entire content of the submission
until
a notice of allegation of allegation has been filed. Thus the 'public giving' of the notice of allegation negates the blanket confidentiality thereafter, the concealment of material from the ANDS should be made only in the public interest and where the material is truly confidential.
"The decision of this Court in
Merck Frosst Canada & Co. v. Canada (Minister of Health)
(2004), 33 C.P.R.(4th) 211 (F.C.), is of little assistance. In that case, a different statutory regime was under consideration, one that did contemplate the expectation of the parties and information to be taken in its entirety and in context."