[2]
The decision to transfer the applicants were made because the respondent believed that the applicants had been involved in a conspiracy to commit prison breach. The gist of the information that came to the knowledge of the respondent is taken from a Progress Summary Appraisal and Recommendation dated September 4, 1992, in the Lee matter.
"A group of General Population inmates was planning a violent helicopter escape from Kent Institution sometime during the month of October, 1992. Although more inmates are involved it is intended that three will attempt to escape. Lee is believed to be one of the three intending to escape. Lee's involvement is seen to be as a leader in organizing the plot.
"Inmate Rocha ... was to be released on Mandatory Supervision in early October, 1992 and was to be a key organizer on the outside. He was to, with assistance, hijack the same helicopter and pilot that were used in a previous helicopter escape from Kent Institution which occurred on June 18, 1990. It was believed by the conspirators that this pilot knows the area very well, particularly at the institution. In order to ensure that the pilot complies with their wishes his wife was to be held hostage during the event. Should the pilot fail to co-operate or should the escape fail, the wife was to be killed.
"The escape was to occur shortly after 1400 hrs on a week-day afternoon when the escapees and accomplices would be in the main Recreation Area as they are all kitchen workers (afternoon recreation is limited to 'shift workers' which include kitchen workers). Just prior to the helicopter arriving, the group of inmates involved were to take the staff supervising the Recreation Area hostage and move them to the Recreation Yard. This was to help ensure that security staff would not shoot the conspirators. Automatic firearms were to be supplied from the helicopter as it landed in the Recreation Yard. The helicopter was to leave the institution with the escapees and proceed south over Mount Cheam into Washington State.
"Following consultation with Ipso D. Dick, local R.C.M.P. has independently investigated the information provided and concluded that the substance of the information appears to be credible. Police agencies have assisted in the investigation and have confirmed that members of the conspiracy have the necessary associations to provide the weapons, manpower and other assistance needed to effect this plan.
"Despite the appearance of maintaining a low profile and being a conscientious kitchen worker, Lee continues to exhibit violent and aggressive behaviour. It is believed that Lee was the main organizer and recruited the other members based on their experience and ability to assist with this plan. Lee's ability to plan and arrange an escape involving the complexities of this plan clearly indicate a disregard for life and the criminal justice system. Another serious concern is the subject's alleged associates in the community which would be willing to participate in a conspiracy of this magnitude. As such, Lee is seen to present a serious and persistent risk to staff and offenders of Kent Institution. Of greater concern in this instance is the high degree of endangerment to the potential innocent victims in the community. As Lee has the capacity and resources to effect a conspiracy that would place in jeopardy the number of individuals involved clearly indicates a need for a transfer to a High Maximum Security Unit.