[22]
A second deficiency with the October 21, 1992 decisions is that they set forth no reasons as to why the Acting Deputy Commissioner came to the conclusion not to alter the September 10, 1992 transfer decisions. Section 14 of the
Transfers of Inmates
directive provides:
"The inmate's written response to a proposed involuntary transfer shall be considered by the decision-maker. At such time as the decision-maker authorizes an involuntary transfer, the reasons for the decision shall be provided, in writing, to the inmate. In those cases where the inmate has provided a written response to the proposed involuntary transfer, the reasons provided by the decision-maker shall indicate that consideration was given to the inmate's response."
While I have indicated that commissioner's directives themselves do not have the force of law, a directive such as s. 14, in my view, adapts procedural fairness rights and indeed s. 7
Charter
protections to the situation of involuntary transfers. It is not sufficient for inmates to be given the right to make submissions. The submissions must be considered by the decision-maker. The requirement that the decision-maker shall indicate that consideration has been given to inmates' responses is not one that is satisfied by lip service. It is not sufficient for a decision to simply state, as was the case here, that consideration was given to an inmate's response. Such a statement does not go far enough in satisfying the requirement that the response was, in fact, considered. Decisions dealing with the liberty of persons, even within the confines of a prison, must come to grips with the principal elements of relevant submissions. In this context, the words of Estey, J., in
Northwestern Utilities Ltd. et al. and City of Edmonton
(1978), 23 N.R. 565; 12 A.R. 449; 89 D.L.R.(3d) 161 at p. 175 are worth noting:
"The law reports are replete with cases affirming the desirability if not the legal obligation at common law of giving reasons for decisions ... This obligation is a salutary one. It reduces to a considerable degree the chances of arbitrary or capricious decisions, reinforces public confidence in the judgment and fairness of administrative tribunals, and affords parties to administrative proceedings an opportunity to assess the question of appeal and if taken, the opportunity in the reviewing or appellate tribunal of a full hearing which may well be denied where the basis of the decision has not been disclosed."