[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application for a judicial review under s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, (as amended to S.C. 1992, c. 1) ("the
Act
") asking this court to set aside the decision of an immigration officer of the Refugee Backlog Clearance Office, pursuant to leave granted by Mr. Justice Rothstein. The decision was that the applicant's claim lacked sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to warrant the issuance of an exemption, pursuant to s. 114(2), of the requirement of a visa under s. 9(1) of the
Act
.
[2]
The grounds of this application are that the respondent:
1. ignored evidence;
2. fettered discretion;
3. failed to follow other policies;
4. denied natural justice and procedural fairness; and
5. erred in law by misconstruing evidence.
1. Ignored Evidence
[3]
The applicant argued that the respondent made no reference to the U.S. Report, which indicated that people returning to Ghana risked several months of detention. It is conceded by the applicant that the Refugee Appeal Board (the Board) had no requirement to mention all data but this was pivotal information and it was an independent source, buttressing the applicant's evidence.
[4]
It was alleged that Mr. Gilles Bénard, Head of the Refugee Backlog Review Unit, was wrong to suggest the applicant had no trouble with the authorities given that both the applicant and the American Department of State report had indicated that the actual problem and the applicant's credibility was never questioned. In a nutshell, says the applicant, Bénard ignored the evidence before him. Even if he did not have problems in the political arena, his association led to political problems being imputed to him, and so a danger if he returned. It is conceded, says the applicant, that Ghana has a repressive regime.
[5]
I cannot accept these arguments as a basis for referring the matter back. The Board had access to the American report. It was argued and obviously rejected by Bénard although no reference is made in the reasons. Bénard found that the applicant "had no previous political problems with the authorities, professed to hold no political opinion and there was no evidence that the authorities were a problem for him or his family members because of any imputed opinion or connection to his own uncle whom he saw briefly". In my view there was a basis for Bénard's decision and this court will not interfere with that conclusion.
[6]
It is important to remember that s. 114(2) of the
Act
provides one last opportunity even though all other appeals have been rejected. Immigration officers are to use their discretion in these situations as a special and additional consideration for an exemption of Canadian immigration laws and a negative decision does not take away any right from an applicant.
2. Fettered Discretion
[7]
The applicant suggests, and it is quite correct, that the officers cannot restrict their mind or attention to a limited number of factors. Did that occur here? It is clear that all of the information available must be examined by the Immigration officer and it is clear that was done here. However, did Bénard see that a credible basis hearing took place, wherein the application was dismissed and so adopt the attitude if no credible basis, then cannot succeed at a humanitarian and compassionate hearing? The applicant says Bénard did exactly that and refers to the Refugee Backlog Review Unit Pre-removal H & C review, which is Exhibit H to Bénard's affidavit, where it reads in part:
"Application for leave has been filed with respect to C.B. [credible basis] hearing and without C.B. there are insufficient H & C [humanitarian and compassionate] grounds, no close relations in Canada able to sponsor, most of relations are in Ghana."
The word "without" was written in by Bénard after he struck out the word "unless".
[8]
From the above, counsel for the applicant argues that Bénard fettered his discretion in that he seems to be saying one cannot succeed at a humanitarian and compassionate hearing if it has been determined that the applicant failed at his credible basis hearing. I cannot accept that interpretation for at least three reasons. First, Bénard would know that if the applicant had succeeded at his credible basis hearing, he wouldn't need a humanitarian and compassionate hearing pursuant to s. 114(2) of the
Act
. Second, it is clear from his affidavit that he considered "all information" and he mentions that the applicant had been found not to have a credible basis to his claim as one of the factors he was aware of, so he needed something to give him the possibility of succeeding at the humanitarian and compassionate hearing. This, said Bénard, was lacking because he had no close relatives in Canada who were able to sponsor him and he still had family ties in Ghana. Also, the very act of striking out the word "unless" removed any doubt that the humanitarian and compassionate grounds had to be considered independently. That was exactly what Bénard did, namely, consider which other "safety net" of s. 114(2) could save the applicant.
Failing To Observe Own Guidelines
[9]
The applicant concedes there is no obligation to provide guidelines to its officer when operating under this area of the
Act
. However, says, the applicant, once in place they must be followed. Exhibit B to Nyame's affidavit is Chapter 9 of the Guideline entitled "Person Seeking Permanent Residence Status in Canada and at 9:07, the applicant cites paragraph 4) Severe Sanctions or Inhumane Treatment in Country of Origin which reads:
"a) Positive consideration may be warranted where there exists a special situation in the person's home country, and undue hardship would likely result from removal. Such persons might face severe government sanctions on returning home because of things they have said or done while in Canada, e.g. while in Canada, a visitor has made public condemnatory comments on the policies of his/her government or has publicly embarrassed a repressive government. Examples include members of official delegations, athletic teams or cultural groups who may have spoken out against their government or whose attempt to remain in Canada could in itself result in official sanctions upon return home.
"b) Others may warrant consideration because of their personal circumstances in relation to current laws and practices in their country of origin. Such persons could reasonably expect unduly harsh or inhumane treatment in their country should they be removed. In these cases there should be strong reasons to believe that the person will face a life threatening situation in his or her homeland as a direct result of the political or social situation in that country. Such situations are more likely to occur in countries with repressive governments or those experiencing civil strife or at war.
"c) Persons described above will, in most cases, have indicated an intention to claim refugee status and a review of their situation will occur in the context of the refugee claim procedures (see IE 12 or the Backlog Clearance procedures (IB) Manual). Officers may, however, also deal with requests from persons who are reluctant to claim refugee status, either because of fear for families living abroad or because they realize that they would not meet the strict Convention Refugee definition. These persons may, nevertheless, feel that their situation warrants special consideration.
"d) Officers will consider the facts of the case and recommend what they believe is reasonable in the particular situation. The onus is on applicants to satisfy the officer that a) a particular situation exists in their country and that, b) their personal circumstances in relation to that situation make them worthy of positive discretion."
[10]
Counsel for the applicant, referring to the American Report and his own client's evidence, argues that the immigration officer ignored this guideline. I cannot agree. The decision made by the officer determined the danger alleged by the applicant was not in fact the case, so had no reason to apply this section of the guideline.
Denied Natural Justice
[11]
Did the respondent err in law by basing his decision on evidence not properly before him and which the applicant had no opportunity to address prior to the rendering of a decision by the respondent?
[12]
This involves the respondent's use of documentary evidence found at Exhibits E, F and G of Bénard's affidavit. Not having or being afforded any opportunity to comment upon this evidence which was relied upon by the respondent in reaching the decision, was the applicant denied procedural fairness? The decision of whether humanitarian and compassionate grounds exist is an administrative one and not to be overturned lightly. However, the decision-maker is required to act fairly in exercising an administrative direction under s. 114(2) and this is well settled. What that duty to act fairly requires is not so well settled. The recent decision of Mr. Justice Denault in
Sellakkandu v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1993), 68 F.T.R. 291 (T.D.), provides a good summary of the jurisprudence on this issue. The applicant must be provided an opportunity to answer the case against him and present his own material and submissions. However, whether that means that an interview or a hearing is required is in dispute. Mr. Justice Denault reviews three decisions on either side of this issue. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[13]
Based on this review, a hearing is not necessary as long as the court is satisfied that the applicant has had a sufficient opportunity to make submissions and answer the case against him. However, one decision not referred to by Denault, J., which is more in line with the facts in this case is
Muliadi v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1986), 66 N.R. 8 (F.C.A.), in which Stone, J.A., held that where a visa officer's decision was based on material which had not been presented to the applicant and which the applicant had not been given an opportunity to refute, the decision could be set aside because it was procedurally unfair.
[14]
The applicant had an opportunity to present his case, albeit by written submissions. In reading the officers' decisions, these submissions appear to have been considered. The one concern is the use of the documentary evidence at Exhibits "E", "F", and "G" of Mr. Bénard's affidavit and the applicant is correct in asserting that he did not have an opportunity to review this evidence. This constitutes a breach of fairness and warrants sending the matter back for redetermination.
[15]
Accordingly, this application is allowed and the decision of the immigration officer and the Refugee Backlog Clearance Office is set aside. This matter is referred back to the Refugee Backlog Clearance Office for a rehearing without prejudice to the applicant to raise any or all of the points made in hearing number one (1).
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
[End of document]
