[2]
The applicant contends that the Adjudicator erred in law in determining that he was not a permanent resident. He argues that there is no statutory bar to facilitating his admission into Canada upon issue of the order-in-council dated November, 1986. The applicant's 1985 disposition arose pursuant to the
Young Offenders Act
, and as such is not treated as equivalent to convictions under the
Criminal Code
according to the immigration policy manual, applicant's record, p. 41. Thus, the Adjudicator erred when he stated that the applicant could not have been landed because his convictions placed him in an inadmissible class. Of course, that does not mean that the applicant was a prize candidate for landed immigrant status or permanent residence in Canada because he was an offender, he had offended against the laws of Canada even though he cannot be fixed with a conviction under the
Criminal Code
. The applicant argues that he had a legitimate expectation that the Immigration Department would arrange for an alternate appointment to accommodate him and allow him to sign his permanent resident document. The applicant contends that the order-in-council issued in November, 1986 constitutes a promise by the respondent that his permanent residence application would be processed. No statutory bar is alleged to prevent his application, and thus his situation is in accordance with Federal Court jurisprudence on this issue, and especially he has cited
Bendahame v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1989), 95 N.R. 385; 8 Imm.L.R.(2d) 20, also
Shankaran v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, a 1997 case in the Federal Court Trial Division, and
Hong Kong (Attorney General) v. Ng Yuen Shiu
, [1983] 2 A.C. 629, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The applicant also urges that any doubts as to his status should be resolved in his favour. The applicant argues that the respondent bears the responsibility of maintaining the applicant's immigration file, and its behaviour in this regard leaves much to be desired given the inconsistent information provided as to the applicant's status. Finally, he says, "It is unfair to consider the applicant's subsequent convictions because he had completed each element necessary for the process of granting permanent residence save for delivery of the document and signing it. The applicant asks for mandamus ordering the respondent to conduct a new inquiry by a different Adjudicator to make a decision on the merits of the applicant's case as the facts existed on September 4th, 1987, and he, of course, asks for certiorari and an order of prohibition prohibiting the Department from proceeding with removal.