[3]
The respondent argues that the principles in
Dass v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, as cited, apply to the instant case. In that case, Mr. Justice Strayer held that a decision is taken to have been made when notice of that decision is given to the parties affected with some measure of formality. The court goes on to state that judicial review cannot be sought of decisions which have never been communicated to the affected parties and that it is inappropriate for the court to rummage through the file in order to determine that all landing requirements have been met, and therefore a positive determination as to landing must be deemed to have occurred at that time. The respondent contends that the C.I.C. has not lost the applicant's immigration file. The status of the file pales in regard to the substantive issues in this case, and whether it is absent in one office or has been lost or destroyed matters little in the court's opinion. The respondent submits that the Adjudicator never made any finding that a youth conviction would bar permanent resident applications. The Adjudicator merely stated that an immigration officer must be satisfied that an applicant has no convictions. Well, of course that is true, and, in effect, the applicant had no convictions on September 4th, 1987, and so it is according to the immigration policy manual, which of course is not law, and by which the court is not bound, but it appears to be correct. That manual states that pursuant to s. 36 of the
Young Offenders Act
, if a youth court directs that a youth is discharged absolutely, or if all dispositions concerning the offence, including a disposition to effect custody, have ceased to have effect, the young person is regarded as not having been convicted. However, a youth convicted in adult court does have a conviction within the meaning of the
Immigration Act
. Therefore an immigration officer must confirm or must be presented with the facts as to whether the youth has been tried in youth court and has been either discharged absolutely or has completed the sentence, before being satisfied that the youth has no convictions within the meaning of the
Immigration Act
. The onus in all of these matters is upon the applicant. The respondent disputes the applicant's argument of legitimate expectation. No evidence indicates that the applicant ever attempted to contact the C.I.C. to re-schedule his appointment, or that the C.I.C. refused to process his permanent residence documents, or that the applicant applied for mandamus between 1987 and 1988 to require the C.I.C. to complete the process. The C.I.C. never told the applicant that it would be sending documentation to him, and because he never appeared to review and sign the papers, he cannot expect the C.I.C. to deliver the record of landing. And the fact that he just didn't bother, that he didn't seem to give a rip in those years, or was unable because he was incarcerated, would seem to take care of the doctrine of legitimate expectations. No duty to resolve any doubts in favour of the applicant exists in this case, the respondent argues, because the applicant has not appeared with clean hands. He engaged in criminal behaviour as a youth, or offensive behaviour, if one flinches at the use of the word "criminal" as a youth, and since 1988 has increased his criminal activities. He is the author of his own misfortune. The respondent further submits that the affidavit evidence of Ingrid Pawlowsky, a senior immigration officer, contradicts the applicant's alleged legitimate expectation that he should be landed. She met with him on December 4th, 1991 at Stony Mountain Institution to determine his status because he had no record of landing and had been convicted of a serious criminal offence. He indicated to her that he chose not to continue processing his application for permanent residence "because he got caught up in the wrong crowd" and left for Edmonton for the next two years before being convicted in Winnipeg on January 31st, 1991 for aggravated assault and possession of a weapon dangerous to the public peace.