[1]
Walsh, D.J.
: Plaintiffs are two of the judges of the Federal Court of Canada appointed by the Governor in Council and seek a declaration that paragraph 14(4)(d) of the Canada Elections Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. 14 (1st Supp.), as amended which disqualifies them in their capacities as such judges from voting in elections of members of the House of Commons be found to be of no force or effect pursuant to section 24 and section 52(1) of the Constitution Act 1982, Part VII.
[2]
Section 3 of the Charter reads
"Every citizen of Canada has the right to vote in an election of members of the House of Commons or of a legislative assembly and to be qualified for membership therein."
[3]
Plaintiffs do not deny that some limits must necessarily be placed on the right to vote (if this were not so children, for example, would have a vote), and this limitation purports to be accomplished by section 14 of the Canada Elections Act. Paragraph 4(d) thereof disqualifies "every judge appointed by the Governor in Council".
[4]
Plaintiffs contend that there are no reasonable limits prescribed by law which can be demonstrably justified to take away from them the right to vote accorded to every Canadian citizen. They disclaim having any qualification for membership in the House of Commons or any legislative assembly, not even in any municipal council or any public elective position. They further concede they have no claim to participate as public political partisans in any such election or at all, and in order to maintain the politically nonpartisan and objective requirements of their judicial offices they rely on the secrecy of the ballot box.
[5]
They further refer to free and democratic societies, namely the Province of Ontario, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland (Eire), New Zealand, Australia, and the United States of America as having no prescription of law whereby judges of superior and district courts are prohibited from voting.
[6]
In answer to this statement of claim defendants file a statement of defence, which is not however a defence of an adversarial nature since it admits all the facts alleged in the statement of claim, and that section 14(4)(d) is not a "reasonable limit prescribed by law" within the meaning of s. 1 of the Charter and that plaintiffs are entitled to a declaration pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 (the Charter) that the said s. 14(4)(d) is of no force or effect.
[7]
While this pleading is not a Confession of Judgment as provided for in section 405 of the Federal Court Rules its effect is the same. It also rendered any evidence or proof of the allegations in plaintiffs' statement of claim unnecessary.
[8]
The issue of a declaratory judgment is always discretionary. Moreover it has been decided in other situations, such as for instance in income tax appeals where the federal treasury is involved, that a judge is not obliged to accept and render judgment on an agreed upon settlement, desistment from a contestation or withdrawal of an appeal if he deems it unjustified by the facts or not in the interest of justice. However, it would only be in comparatively rare and exceptional circumstances that an agreement between the parties (and that is what the defence in the present case really amount to) would not be accepted by the court, after examination, and confirmed by judgment.
[9]
Counsel for defendants explained that a bill had been introduced in Parliament to give federally appointed judges the right to vote but had died on the order paper when Parliament was dissolved for the forthcoming election. One of the problems which had caused some concern arose from the provision of the Controverted Elections Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. 28, which provides for a hearing by trial judges of petitions brought under the Act. While these are normally heard by judges from another district than that in which the dispute has arisen, some concern had been expressed in the event that these judges had expressed a partisan opinion (albeit privately in the secrecy of the ballot box) by themselves voting in the election. Nevertheless the amending legislation was introduced although not adopted prior to dissolution of Parliament.
[10]
Under the circumstances it is understandable that there is no adversarial contestation as such in these proceedings. It is unfortunate and generally undesirable that the courts by interpretation of existing statutes should be called on to deal with matters which should more appropriately be left to legislation by Parliament. The declaration sought by plaintiffs herein will in effect eliminate the need for legislation to give federally appointed judges the right to vote, which has pros and cons which could have been discussed and dealt with in considering the proposed legislation.
[11]
There are two justiciable issues which could have been raised and dealt with in the present proceedings had they been contested and evidence presented to oppose the contentions in plaintiffs' statement of claim. Firstly it is overly simplistic to rely entirely on the secrecy of the ballot box to protect judges from any perceived politically partisan views. In order to get to the ballot box it is necessary to be enumerated and entered on the voters' list. This inevitably leads to visitations by canvassers for the various political parties. Unless the judge turns them away at the door discussions which ensue about the policies of the party represented by the canvasser may well lead to a perception by the canvasser that the judge agrees or does not agree with these policies, and the canvasser, who is not under any oath of silence, may repeat this to others. Neighbors may observe a lengthy call from a canvasser of a known political stripe, and draw perhaps entirely unwanted conclusions that the judge is not politically neutral. I am certainly not suggesting that judges lack the discretion to be careful in not indicating any political views. Many judges have had political affiliations before their appointment, but it has never been suggested that, once appointed, they have ever allowed these views to affect their judgments. They must not only be politically neutral, as plaintiffs concede, but must be perceived to be so by the public. For this reason I am of the view that even if permitted to vote many judges would not wish to do so and refuse to be enumerated and appear on voters' roles and thereby be subject to approaches by political canvassers. The removal of the restriction of section 14(4)(d) of the Elections Act will have the effect of leaving this decision to the individual consciences of the judges. While there is nothing wrong with this and certainly they are entitled to have personal opinions on political issues, as all citizens are it at least might have been arguable that there is a valid objective in restricting their right to vote which might be a reasonable limit prescribed by law, in order to protect them from any possible criticism of not being completely political.
[12]
The other issue which might have been raised had there been an active contestation is the list of free and democratic societies submitted by plaintiffs in which superior court judges are not prohibited from voting, so as to prevent the use of section of the Charter if the issue depended on its application. While it has been decided that a court should not decide such an issue without some evidence on which to the base the decision, a contestation might of course have introduced evidence of other free and democratic societies in which the vote is not give to judges, or have pointed out differences in the societies referred to, such as the fact that United States judges are in most instances elected and therefore not nonpartisan.
[13]
Canadian federal judges appointed by Order-in-Council were aware at the time they accepted appointment that one of the conditions of such appointment was a prohibition of their right to vote in federal elections. Other restrictions of a residential nature are imposed on Supreme Court and Federal Court judges and are accepted when appointed. That is not to say of course that prohibition of the right to vote could not be removed thereafter by Act of Parliament or a judgment interpreting the Charter of Rights as invalidating the prohibition such as is sought in the present proceedings.
[14]
There has been some jurisprudence dealing with other subparagraphs of section 14 of the Canada Elections Act, but even if it had been submitted in argument it would have been of little help in dealing with the present issue as it is readily distinguishable. In the case of Jean-Louis Levesque v. Attorney General of Canada, Solicitor General of Canada and Warden of Leclerc Institution, [1986] 2 F.C. 287, Justice Rouleau had to deal with the case of an inmate in a federal penitentiary in Quebec who wished to vote at a Quebec general election. The Quebec Elections Act permitted inmates to vote. The federal authorities had resisted setting up arrangements to make it feasible for plaintiff to vote in the penitentiary. Section 14(4)(e) of the Canada Elections Act which of course only deals with federal elections prohibits voting by "any person undergoing punishment as an inmate in any federal institution for the commission of any offence". Without specifically referring to the said section the judgment found that the refusal to permit him to vote as allowed by the Quebec Elections Act because he was in a federal penitentiary infringed section 3 of the Charter and that section 1 did not justify this as defendant had not succeeded in showing that imprisonment in a federal penitentiary constituted a reasonable limit on the right to vote which could be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. The decision referred to the judgment of Reed, J., in Gould v. Attorney General of Canada, [1984] 1 F.C. 1119 (T.D.), [1984] 1 F.C. 1133; 54 N.R. 232 (C.A.) which had found that security reasons were not justification for denying inmates the right to vote and that while some prisoners' rights such as freedom of association, of expression, and the right to be a candidate for election must necessarily be curtailed, this did not justify curtailing the entire spectrum, such as the right to vote. A mandamus was accordingly issued as an appropriate remedy pursuant to section 24 of the Charter.
[15]
In a more recent case, that of Canadian Disability Rights Council et al. v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, T-1787-88, dated October 17, 1988, Madame Justice Reed, dealing with section 14(4)(f) of the Canada Elections Act which prohibits from voting "every person who is restrained of his liberty of movement or deprived of the management of his property by reasons of mental disease" held that this clause is too broadly framed to withstand a challenge based on section 3 of the Charter. Referring to the possible application of section 1 she states:
"Section 1 of the Charter allows for limitations which are demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society. I have no doubt that one such limitation might be what I will call a requirement of mental competence or judgmental capacity. But clause 14(4)(f) as presently drafted does not address itself only to mental competence or capacity insofar as that quality is required for the purposes of voting." [See Canadian Disability Rights Council et al. v. Canada (1988), 21 F.T.R. 268].
[16]
She goes on to point out that the term "mental disease" includes persons whose judgment may be impaired in one aspect of their life only, and moreover the section does not exclude from voting those suffering from mental disease whose liberty of movement is not restrained, or whose property is under the control of a committee. She concludes that section 14(4)(f) is both too narrow and too wide, catching people within its ambit who should not be there, and arguably, does not catch people who perhaps should be. She cannot suggest how the section might be severed and hence concludes that section 14(4)(f) is invalid as being in conflict with section 3 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
[17]
There is no such difficulty of definition in section 14(4)(d) under consideration in the present case, "every judge appointed by the Governor-in-Council" - being clear and unambiguous.
[18]
If I have referred to arguments which might have been raised had these been an adversarial contestation it is not that I wish to express any firm conclusion as to their validity nor should I in the absence of any proof before me other than the admission by defendant of all of the allegations in the statement of claim.
[19]
If there is what I consider might be an arguable justification for the application of section 14(4)(d) of the Canada Elections Act, there are also cogent arguments for finding that it is of no force or effect pursuant to sections 24 and 52(1) of the Constitution Act, as defendant concedes.
[20]
As stated at the commencement of these reasons the granting of declaratory relief is discretionary. It should not, however, lightly be refused when there is agreement between the parties that it should be granted unless the court finds that to do so, would not be justified by the facts or would constitute a miscarriage of justice. I cannot so find on the facts before me in the present case. It could well have been decided either way had there been a full contestation.
[21]
The judgment sought by plaintiffs will therefore be granted but without costs as these were not sought save in the event of a contestation by defendants and I do not consider that the defence constitutes a contestation, but rather an admission.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]
