[8]
Whatever the merits, counsel for the applicant argued that the respondent was simply too late in raising this matter having himself filed the defendant's affidavit in reply after the filing of the application for judicial review and the impugned affidavit. Counsel cited
Binepal v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration
(Court file Imm-6506-93, August 29, 1995 (unreported) (F.C.T.D.)) where the respondent had raised two preliminary motions at the outset of the hearing of a judicial review application in respect of an immigration matter. McKeown, J., stated:
"I am of the opinion that the motions should not be granted. Counsel for the applicant correctly pointed out rule 302(c) of the
Federal Court Rules
, and I am in agreement that the above matters should have been raised much earlier than now. The respondent had ample time prior to the hearing to address the issues raised in his motions. Rule 302(c) reads:
'302. The following provisions apply with reference to formal objections and failures to comply with the requirements of these rules: ...'
(c) no application to set aside any proceeding for irregularity shall be allowed unless made within a reasonable time, nor if the party applying has taken any fresh step after knowledge of the irregularity;'"
By contrast, in this matter, on an application on behalf of the applicant for an order extending the time in which the applicant would be allowed to file his supplementary application record and allowing the applicant to file a further affidavit to support his application as part of the supplementary application record, Rothstein J., on the 4th day of April 1995, denied the motion and stated:
"The filing of material on behalf of the applicant (presumably the supporting affidavit here impugned) was by counsel who should be familiar with the
Rules of Court
.
"The argument as to the propriety or otherwise of the affidavit in question will be argued before the judicial review judge."
Clearly Rothstein, J., contemplated the preliminary consideration which came before me and did not regard it as a matter that should have been disposed of in advance of the judicial review hearing. This would appear to accord with the position enunciated by Strayer, J.A., in
Bull (David) Laboratories (Canada) Inc. v. Pharmacia Inc. et al.
(1994), 176 N.R. 48; 58 C.P.R.(3d) 209, at pp. 214-215, where he stated:
"Thus the direct and proper way to contest an originating notice of motion which the respondent thinks to be without merit is to appear and argue at the hearing of the motion itself."
The same could be said here where the challenge to the affidavit in support of the applicant's application for judicial review is in fact a challenge to the application itself since, if the affidavit is struck, the application is without a supporting factual basis.