[12]
To be precise, the Board concluded as follows about the bookstore incident:
...Given that the environment around the university was tense because people were being arrested and some were running away to avoid arrest, the panel finds it implausible that the claimant would go to the store in the midst of public unrest. If he was so fearful about the situation and had participated in the demonstration, the claimant would have just run away, instead of risking being where there was security, which would have arrested him.
The panel finds the claimant's testimony unreliable and untrustworthy. Despite having been told by the store owner to go away for his security, the claimant alleges he returned to the bookstore after three days, and the bookstore owner told him again to go away because Babbak, the claimant's cousin and his friends had told the security about the claimant's role in photocopying the flyer. When asked why the claimant returned to the bookstore three days after he had been told to go away for his own security, the claimant said he went back to look for his cousin, Babbak. The panel finds the explanation unsatisfactory because the claimant testified that during the demonstration he and his cousin were not together. The claimant said he and his cousin did not go to the demonstration together, they went separately. Therefore, the panel finds it puzzling that the claimant would go back to the bookstore, a place near the university where the demonstration had occurred, and was still under surveillance by security, which indicates a lack of subjective fear.
Given that security had been told that the claimant made photocopies of the flyer, if Sepah or Pasda had to live by their reputation of harassing, beating and torturing friends, or relatives of the suspects, as they are known for, Sepah, Pasdar or Hezbollahis could have closed the bookstore or beat the owner of the bookstore in order to find out about the whereabouts of the claimant. Further, security could have been looking for him since he worked there and lived on the second floor of the bookstore. Based on the above analysis, the panel finds the claimant's testimony is fabricated and not credible.