[20]
Mr. Fernström described the V-cut and the burn cut this way respectively:
"The upper one [referring to a diagram on Exhibit P-8 - V-cut] showing ... a cross-section place of the tunnel where you stand behind with the drill rig and drill a number of holes, and on the left side is the top view of the tunnel showing the direction of the holes drilled.
"Most of the holes in the tunnel face are parallel--that is, drilled straight into the tunnel--but in the centre you have three layers of six holes in each level where you angle the holes, therefore the name of the V-cut drill. Using a fourmetre long feed, of course, while angling the holes, you only get a drilling depth of two and a half metres.
"The lower picture (in Exhibit P-8) shows the parallel cut or a burn cut, and there we have gone over to another technology where all the holes are drilled parallel. So, on the right side, you see, again, the cross-section of the tunnel, and on the left side, a top view of the tunnel where all the holes go parallel four metres into the tunnel.
"To be able to get the rock to move, this V-cut--going back to the upper picture--is done in such a way that you first blast these centre holes. That way, when you will blast these holes first, the rock lies backwards, moves backwards, and then you can shoot the surrounding holes and the rock is blasted out of the position back in the tunnel so that they can be easily mucked out with the loading machinery.
"The burn cut instead means that you drill a big hole or a couple of big holes in the centre. This big hole is not charged with explosives, and around these holes you have a configuration of holes which you blast toward this opening hole in the middle and you get the sort of cannon effect.
"When you blast the first four holes, the explosive shoots out backwards, and then you can follow after shooting the other holes around the centre hole. ... It is only some milliseconds in between. So, you have ignitors with a time difference between them so that the whole round only takes maybe half a minute or a minute to blast them, but you have some short intervals.
"You blast the inner holes, then the next row, et cetera, until you are out in the outer row.
"The parallel cut also gave a chance to drill and blast deeper per round which also demanded smoother tunnel walls."