 [15] 
  The respondent submits that the second Rothenberg affidavit and the Baker affidavit filed in this court on the appeal address the following insufficiencies in the first Rothenberg affidavit raised by the appellant in its notice of appeal or in its submission to the Senior Hearing Officer. 
 
 
 
 (a) The appellant submitted before the Senior Hearing Officer and in its Notice of Appeal that Rothenberg had no personal knowledge of the activities of National Tobacco, despite being an Executive VP of National's parent company. 
 
 
 
 Response: The Baker affidavit identifies her as the Secretary of National and confirms and supplements the evidence of Rothenberg. 
 
 
 
 (b) The appellant submitted before the Senior Hearing Officer and in its Notice of Appeal that the first Rothenberg affidavit was insufficient to demonstrate use of control over character and quality of wares. 
 
 
 
 Response: The second Rothenberg and the Baker affidavits confirm the first Rothenberg affidavit that respondent manufactures, packages and labels the WRANGLER smokeless tobacco. 
 
 
 
 (c) The appellant contested before the Senior Hearing Officer and in its Notice of Appeal that there was no evidence in the first Rothenberg affidavit that the label attached as Exhibit C thereto was the same label as that attached to products sold by National. 
 
 
 
 Response: The second Rothenberg and Baker affidavits confirm that Exhibit C label is attached to products sold by National. 
 
 
 
 (d) In the Notice of Appeal, the appellant contends that the Senior Hearing Officer erred in concluding that the trademark was used by respondent in normal course of trade. 
 
 
 
 Response: The Baker affidavit addresses this point. 
 
 
 
 Relevant Provisions Of 
 
 The Trade-marks Act 
 
 
 
 "45(1) The Registrar may at any time and, at the written request made after three years from the date of the registration of a trademark by any person who pays the prescribed fee shall, unless the Registrar sees good reason to the contrary, give notice to the registered owner of the trademark requiring the registered owner to furnish within three months an affidavit or a statutory declaration showing, with respect to each of the wares or services specified in the registration, whether the trademark was in use in Canada at any time during the three year period immediately preceding the date of the notice and, if not, the date when it was last so in use and the reason for the absence of such use since that date. 
 
 
 
 "(2) The Registrar shall not receive any evidence other than the affidavit or statutory declaration, but may hear representations made by or on behalf of the registered owner of the trademark or by or on behalf of the person at whose request the notice was given. 
 
 
 
 "4(1) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of the wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred. 
 
 
 
 "56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(5) On an appeal under subs. (1), evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar." R.S., c. T-10, s. 56; R.S., c. 10(2nd Supp.), s. 64. 
 
