[57]
I agree that, as a matter of law, if this was the only evidence before the Adjudicator the burden would have shifted to the grievance respondent to introduce some responding evidence. However, the grievance respondent placed the following information before the GAB (which formed part of the record at subsequent levels of review):
"The primary element of this policy deals with disposal of a principal residence and the purchase of a new principal residence at a retirement destination. Any transfer of a member in relation to the provisions of this section is at best an inferred appropriation, not a right or an obligation on the part of the RCMP. Staffing and Personnel do not ordinarily do job searches for retiring members. If there is a need within the RCMP that coincides with those a member seeking to retire, and both parties can benefit, there is consideration give to those circumstances. This is not initiated by Staffing and Personnel, it is normally undertaken by the interested member.
. . . . .
"On 1999-06-08 Cst. Marsh emailed (A-8) Supt. Schlecker, quoting Admin. Man. VI.2.P.1.b, advising she was aware of other members who were allowed to take a pre-retirement move and continue to work for another two years. She requested 'E' Division Staffing and Personnel contact 'K' Division Staffing and Personnel to determine if a position would be available for her to take on in a similar fashion. Supt. Schlecker responded by email (A-8) on the same date by saying 'E' Division was not releasing members to other Divisions, unless the other Division identified a need and was willing to pay for both the exiting and the backfill moves. He further stated 'K' Division had not indicated a need. Supt. Schlecker advised Cst. Marsh she would obtain reimbursement of real estate and legal fees, however, she would not be entitled to a pre-retirement move and a new job for two years.
. . . . .
"There may be circumstances where members are accommodated with pre-retirement moves, however, they are primarily in conjunction with a Division's operational needs combined with those of the retiring member. To migrate towards inter-Divisional pre-retirement transfer considerations would be an unhealthy position for Staffing and Personnel to adopt, and to my knowledge, it is not done.
"I would like to point out Career Management Manual 3.D.3.a. where it states, '
In the lateral transfer planning process the organizational needs of the RCMP take precedence
.' (A-12)
"Cst. Marsh's request to have a position identified in 'K' Division whereby she could take a pre-retirement move did not meet with the organizational needs of the day; in that, neither 'K' nor 'E' Division were willing to fund a transfer of this nature. She was advised of this position in a forthwith manner, by Supt. Schlecker, when she posed a question/request on the issue. She was not misguided on this matter in any way by 'E' Division Staffing and Personnel. Even though there may be circumstances where pre-retirement transfers are considered, it is usually in an environment whereby the RCMP pays for the transfer (not within the provisions of Admin. Man.VI.P.1.b. but under regular transfer conditions) to meet an existing need in the organization. In the matter of Cst. Marsh's retirement, this was not considered an option for 'K' Division or 'E' Division."