 [20] 
  The Board, created by the  
 VRAA 
 , is the only review and appeal board for veterans' pensions and has been since its inception. Sections 3 and 39 of that  
 Act 
  provide the general rules of evidence and interpretation applicable to pension applications: 
 
 
 
 "3. The provisions of this Act and of any other Act of Parliament or of any regulations made under this or any other Act of Parliament conferring or imposing jurisdiction, powers, duties or functions on the Board shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their country so well and to their dependants may be fulfilled. 
 
 
 
 "39. In all proceedings under this Act, the Board shall 
 
 
 
 (a) draw from all the circumstances of the case and all the evidence presented to it every reasonable inference in favour of the applicant or appellant; 
 
 
 
 (b) accept any uncontradicted evidence presented to it by the applicant or appellant that it considers to be credible in the circumstances; and 
 
 
 
 (c) resolve in favour of the applicant or appellant any doubt, in the weighing of evidence, as to whether the applicant or appellant has established a case." 
 
 
 
 Section 31 of the  
 VRAA 
 , which contains a privative clause, and s. 32(1), which provides for the reconsideration of decisions, should also be noted: 
 
 
 
 "31. A decision of the majority of members of an appeal panel is a decision of the Board and is final and binding. 
 
 
 
 "32(1) Notwithstanding section 31, an appeal panel may, on its own motion, reconsider a decision made by it under subsection 29(1) or this section and may either confirm the decision or amend or rescind the decision if it determines that an error was made with respect to any finding of fact or the interpretation of any law, or may do so on application if the person making the application alleges that an error was made with respect to any finding of fact or the interpretation of any law or if new evidence is presented to the appeal panel." 
 
 
 
 Moreover, s. 38 of the  
 VRAA 
  allows the Board to obtain medical advice: 
 
 
 
 "38(1) The Board may obtain independent medical advice for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act and may require an applicant or appellant to undergo any medical examination that the Board may direct. 
 
 
 
 "(2) Before accepting as evidence any medical advice or report on an examination obtained pursuant to subsection (1), the Board shall notify the applicant or appellant of its intention to do so and give them an opportunity to present argument on the issue." 
 
 
 
 Furthermore, paragraph 21(1)(a) and s. 21(5) of the  
 Pension Act 
 , supra, are also material in this case: 
 
 
 
 "21(1) In respect of service rendered during World War I, service rendered during World War II other than in the non-permanent active militia or the reserve army, service as a member of the special force, service in the Korean War, and service in a special duty area as a member of the Canadian Forces, 
 
 
 
 (a) where a member of the forces suffers disability resulting from an injury or disease or an aggravation thereof that was attributable to or was incurred during such military service, a pension shall, on application, be awarded to or in respect of the member in accordance with the rates for basic and additional pension set out in Schedule I; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(5) In addition to any pension awarded under subsection (1) or (2), a member of the forces who 
 
 
 
 (a) is eligible for a pension under paragraph (1)(a) or (2)(a) or this subsection in respect of an injury or disease or an aggravation thereof, or has suffered an injury or disease or an aggravation thereof that would be pensionable under that provision if it had resulted in a disability, and 
 
 
 
 (b) is suffering an additional disability that is in whole or in part a consequence of the injury or disease or the aggravation referred to in paragraph (a) 
 
 
 
 shall, on application, be awarded a pension in accordance with the rates for basic and additional pension set out in Schedule I in respect of that part of the additional disability that is a consequence of that injury or disease or aggravation thereof." 
 
 
 