 [38] 
  THIS COURT ORDERS that 
 
 
 
 1. As regards the Crown Lease document dated April 1969, the Agency shall disclose this document in response to the request but shall not disclose the following portions, which will be redacted and removed by the Agency prior to disclosure: 
 
 
 
 (a) On page 1, the "To Have And To Hold" paragraph shall be removed in its entirety; 
 
 
 
 (b) On page 1, subparagraph (a) under the "Yielding And Paying Therefor" paragraph shall be edited to remove the amount of the annual rent; 
 
 
 
 (c) On page 3, paragraph 14, lines 6 and 7 shall be removed; 
 
 
 
 (d) On page 3, paragraph 15, the final 3 lines shall be removed; 
 
 
 
 (e) Paragraph 16, on pages 3 and 4, shall be removed in its entirety; 
 
 
 
 (f) On page 4, paragraph 21 shall be removed in its entirety. 
 
 
 
 2. As regards the Crown Lease document dated February 24, 1982, the Agency shall disclose this document in response to the request but shall not disclose the following portions, which will be redacted and removed by the Agency prior to disclosure; 
 
 
 
 (a) On page 1, the final 2 lines of paragraph 3 shall be removed; 
 
 
 
 (b) On page 2, in subparagraphs 7(a), 7(b), 7(c), 7(d) and 7(e), the percentage rate in the first line and the actual dollar amount of the appraised value in the second line of each of these paragraphs shall be removed. 
 
 
 
 3. At such time as the present negotiations concerning the renewal of the Crown Leases shall have been concluded (either through the execution of new leasing arrangements by the parties or by the breaking off of negotiations by either party) the Applicant shall immediately notify the Agency that the negotiations have concluded and the Agency shall release the redacted information (as outlined in paragraph 1 and 2 above) to the Requester; 
 
 
 
 4. At any time prior to the release of all of the information contained in the Crown Leases in accordance with the terms of this Order, the parties may, by motion made to this Court, seek further relief or directions concerning the release of the information to be excluded from disclosure in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Order. 
 
 
 
 5. No order shall be made as to costs. 
 
 
 
 Order accordingly. 