 [4] 
  As to the role of the court in cases under s. 41, it is to be noticed that the power of the Commission to make decisions under that section is stated in the following terms: 
 
 
 
 "41. ... the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint  
 it appears to the Commission 
  ..." (emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 In  
 Williams v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
  (1997), 212 N.R. 63 (F.C.A.), Strayer, J.A., in respect of s. 70(5) of the  
 Immigration Act 
 , states at p. 71: 
 
 
 
 "It is striking that s. 70(5) says that no appeal may be made under s. 70(1) 'where the Minister is of the opinion ...' not 'where a judge is of the opinion ...' that the deportee constitutes a danger. Nor did Parliament put the matter in objective terms whereby a certificate precluding further appeal could only be issued where it is 'established' or 'determined' that the appellant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada. Instead the power to make such a finding is stated in subjective terms: the test is not whether the permanent resident is a danger to the public but whether 'the Minister is of the opinion' that he is such a danger. There is ample authority that, unless the overall scheme of the  
 Act 
  indicates otherwise through e.g., an unlimited right of appeal of such an opinion [footnote omitted] such subjective decisions cannot be judicially reviewed except on grounds such as that the decision-maker acted in bad faith, or erred in law, or acted upon the basis of irrelevant considerations." 
 
 
 
 I think the same approach is called for with respect to s. 41 of the  
 Canadian Human Rights Act 
 . The decision is one for the Commission and the determination is set forth in subjective and not objective terms. Thus the scope for judicial review of such a decision is narrow. Only considerations such as bad faith by the Commission, error of law or acting on the basis of irrelevant considerations are applicable.