[18]
The Davis patent, which issued in 1954, contained a stiffened area on the interior panel, as well as stiffened portions on other areas of the bag. It is clear that the purpose of the stiffening was to allow the bag to stand up right when in a closed position. Counsel for the defendant argues that this patent should be read together with either or both Kish and Krynoski, for a finding that the plaintiffs' patent was obvious. I do not think one could base a finding of obviousness out of the reading together of these patents. Also, I do not think a finding of obviousness would arise on the reading of all fourteen prior art patents together. In coming to these conclusions, I am aware that eleven of the fourteen patents are now more than thirty years old. I echo the words of my colleague, Mr. Justice Strayer, in Mahurkar v. Vas-Cath Of Canada Ltd. et al. (Court file number T-1128-86, decision dated January 15, 1988, 16 F.T.R. 48), at page 21 [of his reasons for judgment and p. 61 F.T.R.]:
"No evidence was produced by the defendants to show that the ordinary skilled workman should be assumed to have been aware of all of this prior art. Frankly I find it difficult to believe that several of the items of prior art would have been present to the mind of the ordinary skilled workman in 1981."
In Ernest Scragg & Sons Ltd. v. Leesona Corp. (1964), 45 C.P.R. 1, at 90, it was held:
"There is authority for holding that the court should look askance at the effort of a party to defeat a new and useful invention by the plea that it was obvious. That plea is frequently the last resort of the infringer ..."
And more recently in Beloit Canada Ltd. et al. v. Valmet Oy (1986), 64 N.R. 287; 8 C.P.R.(3d) 289, at 294, the Federal Court of Appeal stated:
"The test for obviousness is not to ask what competent inventors did or would have done to solve the problem. Inventors are by definition inventive. The classical touchstone for obviousness is the technician skilled in the art but having no scintilla of inventiveness or imagination; a paragon of deduction and dexterity, wholly devoid of intuition; a triumph of the left hemisphere over the right. The question to be asked is whether this mythical creature (the man in the Clapham omnibus of patent law) would, in the light of the state of the art and of common general knowledge as at the claimed date of invention, have come directly and without difficulty to the solution taught by the patent.
It is a very difficult test to satisfy
." (underlining added)
See also Xerox of Canada Ltd. et al. v. IBM Canada Ltd. (1978), 33 C.P.R.(2d) 24, at page 48 (F.C.T.D.).