[25]
The question to be answered is whether the defendant, in producing and marketing "The Organizer" and "The Ultimate", has taken the substance of the plaintiffs' invention. The test is not in dispute. It was discussed in Nelson Burns & Co. Ltd. et al. v. Gratham Industries Ltd. et al. (1983), 42 O.R.(2d) 705 (Ont. H. Ct.), at page 729-730. That court referred to the Federal Court of Appeal decision in Cutter (Canada) Ltd. v. Baxter Travenol Laboratories of Canada Ltd. et al. (1983), 68 C.P.R.(2d) 179:
"'A useful review of the law on this subject is found in the judgment of the former President of the Exchequer Court in McPhar Engineering Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Sharpe Instruments Ltd. et al. (1960), 35 C.P.R. 105 [at pp. 155-156]; 21 Fox Pat. C. 1 [at p. 54]; [1956-60] Ex. C.R. 467. The subject is also discussed in the more recent case of Catnic Components Ltd. et al. v. Hill & Smith Ltd., [1981] F.S.R. 60].'
"Counsel for the plaintiffs rely on the reference to the Catnic case as an accurate statement of the law as to infringement, and claim that this rather terse reference by Thurlow, C.J., incorporates it in the patent law of Canada.
"The first case, McPhar Engineering Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Sharpe Instruments Ltd. et al. (1960), 35 C.P.R. 105; 21 Fox Pat. C. 1; [1956-60] Ex. C.R. 467, was decided by Thorson, P., who, in the course of extended and learned reasons applied the test in Clark v. Adie (1875), 10 Ch. App. 667, affirmed 2 App. Cas. 315, where Lord Gairns laid down the 'pith and marrow' test succinctly stated in another authority quoted by the learned President [at p. 158], the judgment of Parker, J., in Marconi et al. v. British Radio-Telegraph & Telephone Co. Ltd. (1911), 28 R.P.C. 181, at p. 217:
'It is a well-known rule of Patent law that no one who borrows the substance of a patented invention can escape the consequences of infringement by making immaterial variations. From this point of view, the question is whether the infringing apparatus is substantially the same as the apparatus said to have been infringed.'
"Turning to Catnic Components Ltd. et al. v. Hill & Smith Ltd., [1981] 7 F.S.R. 60, before the House of Lords in the latter part of 1980, Lord Diplock, with whom the remainder of the House agreed, restoring the judgment at trial, had this to say at pp. 65-66:
'My Lords, a patent specification is a unilateral statement by the patentee, in words of his own choosing, addressed to those likely to have a practical interest in the subject matter of his invention (i.e. "skilled in the art"), by which he informs them what he claims to be the essential features of the new product or process for which the letters patent grant him a monopoly. It is those novel features only that he claims to be essential that constitute the socalled "pith and marrow" of the claim. A patent specification should be given a purposive construction rather than a purely literal one derived from applying to it the kind of meticulous verbal analysis in which lawyers are too often tempted by their training to indulge. The question in each case is: whether persons with practical knowledge and experience of the kind of work in which the invention was intended to be used, would understand that strict compliance with a particular descriptive word or phrase appearing in a claim was intended by the patentee to be an essential requirement of the invention so that any variant would fall outside the monopoly claimed, even though it could have no material effect upon the way the invention worked.
'The question, of course, does not arise where the variant would in fact have a material effect upon the way the invention worked. Nor does it arise unless at the date of publication of the specification it would be obvious to the informed reader that this was so. Where it is not obvious, in the light of then existing knowledge, the reader is entitled to assume that the patentee thought at the time of the specification that he had good reason for limiting his monopoly so strictly and had intended to do so, even though subsequent work by him or others in the field of the invention might show the limitation to have been unnecessary. It is to be answered in the negative only when it would be apparent to any reader skilled in the art that a particular descriptive word or phrase used in a claim cannot have been intended by a patentee, who was also skilled in the art, to exclude minor variants which, to the knowledge of both him and the readers to whom the patent was addressed, could have no material effect upon the way in which the invention worked.'"
The issue was also addressed by Mr. Justice Mahoney in Globe-Union Inc. v. Varta Batteries Ltd. (1981), 57 C.P. R.(2d) 132, at page 146:
"In my view, the defendant has appropriated the invention of the connection patent. The refinement of creating the projections during the 'squeeze' stage may well be a significant improvement on the patented method but that is what it remains; it is not a new or different method. The substance of the patented method remains in the defendant's method. As has been said, perhaps more colourfully than the present situation warrants,
'... if the pith and marrow of the invention is taken it is no excuse to say that you have added something, or omitted something, even if the addition or omission be useful and valuable. The superadding of ingenuity to a robbery does not make the operation justifiable.'"
My reading of this jurisprudence leads me to conclude that in order to find substantial infringement, one must ask: (1) do the two articles operate functionally in the same way (in the words of the Catnic case: "whether the variant would have a material effect on the way the invention worked"); (2) even if they do so operate, is it clear from the text of the patent that the variant which is challenged as an infringement was one which was intended to be covered by the patent, even though the words of the text do not actually so provide. In the words of counsel for the defendant, "is it part of the territory which the patentee has fenced off".