[42]
There is one other argument made by the defendant with which I must deal. The defendant argues that interlocutory injunctions are granted to preserve the status quo and that the status quo is that existing at the time the application for an interlocutory injunction is heard. Since, at the time this application was heard, both the defendant and the plaintiffs were in the market place, selling their respective garment bags, it is argued an injunction should not be granted to upset that situation. It is argued that to do so would upset, not preserve, the status quo. I have great difficulty with this argument. I must admit frankly that I do not know what the "status quo" requirement adds to the analysis of whether or not an interlocutory injunction should be granted. Literally, it would seem to indicate that injunctions should always be granted when sought at the quia timet stage but never granted at a later period of time. It seems to me the phrase is used, in the cases where the plaintiff is successful, to refer to the status quo before the defendant commenced the infringing action, and in the cases where the defendant is successful, to the status quo at a time after the infringing action has commenced. In the American Cyanamid case (supra, at p. 408) Lord Diplock referred to the status quo in the following passage:
"Where other factors appear to be evenly balanced it is a counsel of prudence to take such measures as are calculated to preserve the status quo. If the defendant is enjoined temporarily from doing something that he has not done before, the only effect of the interlocutory injunction in the event of his succeeding at the trial is to postpone the date at which he is able to embark on a course of action which he has not previously found it necessary to undertake; whereas to interrupt him in the conduct of an established enterprise would cause much greater inconvenience to him since he would have to start again to establish it in the event of his succeeding at the trial."
The status quo requirement framed thus seems to me to be merely a reiteration of one of the factors which enters into balance of convenience considerations, i.e. the disadvantages attendant upon dislocating an established enterprise.
Evidentiary Considerations
(1)
expert evidence by a patent agent