[6]
Before considering the four reports at issue, Hargrave, P., dealt with several preliminary issues raised by the parties. The first issue was whether the dominant purpose should be measured by the intent of the author of the report (the adjuster) or by the intent of the party ordering the report (the defendant's insurer). On this matter, Hargrave, P., stated:
"In this instance, it bothers me somewhat that the only evidence of intention is that of the author of the reports, who is an investigator, but who makes no decisions as to putting the reports to a lawyer in order to obtain advice or to assist the lawyer with the litigation. I believe that the answer to this issue may be found in the following passage from the 1991 Supreme Court Practice (The White Book), section 24/5/9 at p. 436:
'The dominant purpose of a document does not necessarily fall to be ascertained by reference to the intention of its actual composer (
Guiness Peat Properties Ltd. v. Fitzroy Robinson Partnership
, [1987] 1 W.L.R. 1027; [1987] 2 All E.R. 716, C.A.). The person of authority under whose direction a document is produced or brought into existence is in many cases the employer of the author; in such cases reference must be made to the intentions of the employer rather than to the intention of the author alone (
Waugh v. British Railways Board
(above);
McAvan v. London Transport Executive
, [1982] C.A. Transcript 498). In other cases a document may be brought into existence at the direction of insurers (either as a condition of the insurance policy of a party to the action or otherwise). In such cases reference must be made to the intention of the insurers.'
"Thus it is the view of the editions of The White Book that if the report is commissioned by an insurer, it is the insurer's intention that is relevant.
"Lord Justice Slade wrote the judgment for the Court of Appeal in
Guinness Pete Ltd. v. Fitzroy Robinson
(1987), 1 W.L.R. 1027. At p. 1036 he noted '... that the dominant purpose of a document does not necessarily fall to be ascertained by reference to the intention of its actual composer is borne out by a number of reasoned authorities.'. He then referred to several authorities including
Re Highgrade Traders Ltd.
, [1984] B.C.L.C. 151 in which the court considered the purpose of insurers in instigating reports, not the intentions of the writers of the reports themselves. He concluded that the dominant purpose of the document in question '... must be viewed objectively on the evidence, particularly by reference to the intention of the insurers who procured its genesis.'" (p. 1037). (Reasons for Order, note 6 at 9-10.)