[37]
Linden, J.A., went on to hold that, in order to adhere to s. 7, a claimant must be given an opportunity to have new evidence of potential persecution in the home country considered by an authoritative body. What was crucial, given that the evidence in question arose subsequent to the hearing and the decision of the adjudicator, was the existence of a mechanism for such evidence to be meaningfully considered and not that the claimant was accorded the most procedurally stringent means to have such evidence considered. In the words of Linden, J.A., (at p. 172-173):
"In my view, the Canadian justice system has not unfairly closed its doors on this applicant. Rather, he has already had the opportunity to present his new facts, in one form or another, to several authoritative bodies, without success.
These new facts may not have been examined in the particular way he would have liked them to be, but fundamental justice does not mandate a particular method of dealing with legal or factual issues. Although a particular method of dealing with legal or factual issues is not demanded, what is required by the terms of section 7, in cases such as the instant case, is that the refugee claimant be given an ample opportunity to have new evidence of potential persecution in his home country heard and fully considered by an authoritative body
. Clearly, such a requirement has been met in this case through the applicant's submission in the proceedings subsequent to his original hearing. When the applicant appealed the 1985 decision deporting him, he argued his new facts, for the first time, before a Board, stating that he was at risk if he were returned to India. The Board heard that argument, assessed that evidence and rejected it as 'mere speculation'. Further, when the applicant appealed to the Minister on compassionate and humanitarian grounds, he relied, for a second time on the new facts about the danger he would face if he returned to India. The Minister, in rejecting his claim, presumably considered this new evidence and was not persuaded. Later, when he sought to reopen the 1989 decision of the Appeal Division, he argued, for the third time, his new facts that he was at risk and again he was unsuccessful. In launching his last application to reopen the 1985 inquiry, which is under attack here, the applicant sought to rely, for a fourth time, on the new facts of the danger he would now face if he were to be returned to India, and again he was not successful in convincing the adjudicator to reopen the inquiry. He nevertheless, comes to this court, and urges me that his s. 7 rights were violated by the adjudicator. I am not persuaded. The applicant has had ample opportunity to convince tribunals of the importance of his new facts, and each time he has failed. This is not a denial of fundamental justice. As Mr. Justice La Forest stated in another context in
R. v. Beare
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 387:
'Section 7 of the
Charter
guarantees fair procedures, but it does not guarantee the most favourable procedures that can be possibly imagined.'"	(emphasis added)