[29]
The document
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines: Domestic Violence, including police responses to complaints (2002 to April 2003)
, by the Research Directorate of the Board (Tribunal Record, at page 116), states the following:
"The police respond to all calls of domestic violence. According to the coordinator [of the SVGHRA], the police are doing 'their job' with regards to filing complaints of domestic violence and have responded adequately to the problem. In the past, women tended to abandon complaints of domestic violence against perpetrators. But this trend has shifted somewhat, and more and more women are willing to seek judicial redress, although many still refuse to pursue their case once they have been filed with the police.
"Since 1992, victims of domestic violence have had access to legal redress through the Family Court system. The Family Court provides judicial and counselling services free of charge. Victims can also seek assistance through the SVGHRA, Marion Hall, a non-governmental social services agency, and the government's Ministry of Social Services.
. . . . .
"She [a counsellor and coordinator of the youth assistance program at Marion House] corroborated the information provided by the coordinator of the SVGHRA regarding shelters and legal aid clinics, but provided contrasting information regarding the police response to complaints of domestic violence by stating that they are 'very poor'. She added that many officers are 'unhelpful' in providing information to victims of domestic violence about their legal rights. According to the coordinator, most cases are not taken seriously and are met with indifference. The general attitude tends to marginalize the problem of domestic violence; moreover, given that the country is small, there is a feeling among victims that there is no protection available and that there is 'no place to go'.
"Few perpetrators of domestic violence are arrested, and when they are, they are soon after released. Many of the perpetrators are police officers themselves. Cases that make it to the judicial level are often thrown out either for lack of evidence or for technical reasons. Services for victims are 'minimal'. For those women seeking legal redress, Marion House can refer them to lawyers who provide services pro-bono."