 [19] 
  Whether an employer's conduct constitutes discipline has been the subject of a number of arbitral and judicial decisions from which several accepted principles have emerged. A useful summary of the authorities is contained within the following passage from Brown and Beatty,  
 Canadian Labour Arbitration 
  (4th Ed.), at para. 7:4210: 
 
 
 
 "[...] In deciding whether an employee has been disciplined or not, arbitrators look at both the purpose and effect of the employer's action. The essential characteristic of disciplinary action is an intention to correct bad behaviour on an employee's part by punishing the employee in some way. An employer's assurance that it did not intend its action to be disciplinary often, but not always, settles the question. 
 
 
 
 "Where an employee's behaviour is not culpable and/or the employer's purpose is not to punish, whatever action is taken will generally be characterized as non-disciplinary. On the basis of this definition, arbitrators have ruled that suspensions that required an employee to remain off work on account of his or her health, or pending the resolution of criminal charges, were not disciplinary sanctions. Similarly, transfers and demotions for non-culpable reasons, the revocation of a civil servant's 'reliability status', financial levies that were compensatory rather than punitive, shift assignments designed to facilitate closer supervision, and deeming an employee to have quit his or her employment, have all been characterized as non-disciplinary. For the same reason, counselling and warning employees about excessive but innocent absenteeism have generally not been regarded as disciplinary. On the other hand, it has been held that even where an employee falls ill during the course of serving a disciplinary suspension and is in receipt of sick pay benefits for part of the time he or she is off work, that hiatus will not alter the disciplinary character of the employee's suspension. 
 
 
 
 "A disciplinary sanction must at least have the potential to prejudicially affect an employee's situation, although immediate economic loss is not required. Suspensions with pay, which have the essential objective of correcting unacceptable behaviour, for example, would still be regarded as disciplinary even though they do not sanction the employee financially." (Footnotes omitted)