 [17] 
  As noted by Justice Noël in  
 Gaya v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2007 FC 989, [2007] FCJ No 1308, the tests for a PRRA and H&C are different: 
 
 
 
 [24] The test to be applied to H&C applications is set out in paragraph 17 of  
 Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817, [1999] S.C.J. No. 39, which confirms the standard as set out in the IP-5 Manual. Madame Justice Claire L'Heureux-Dubé wrote among other things: 
 
 
 
 17 [...] Guideline 9.07 states that humanitarian and compassionate grounds will exist if " 
 unusual 
 ,  
 undeserved 
  or  
 disproportionate 
   
 hardship 
  would be caused to the person seeking consideration if he or she had to leave Canada". [...] [the Court's emphasis] 
 
 
 
 [25] In application of this standard, this Court has established that while it is appropriate to rely on the risk factors in a prior PRRA report when making an H&C decision, the Officer must nonetheless be mindful to distinguish between the standards of proof specific to each type of application. 
 
 
 
 [26] The Chief Justice said it best in  
 Pinter v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2005] F.C.J. No. 366, 2005 FC 296 at paragraphs 2 to 5: 
 
 
 
 2 In explaining her rationale for her refusal of the Pinters' request for permanent residence within Canada, the immigration officer noted: 
 
 
 
 • I have not dealt with the risk factors of the applications since they were reviewed by the Pre-Removal Risk Assessment officer who determined the family would not be at risk if they were returned to Hungary. The risk identified in the Humanitarian and Compassionate application is identical to the risk identified in the PRRA application. 
 
 
 
 Contrary to the immigration officer's suggestion, there is a difference between the assessment of risk factors in an application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration and one for protection from removal. 
 
 
 
 3 In an application for humanitarian and compassionate consideration under section 25 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), the applicant's burden is to satisfy the decision-maker that there would be unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada. 
 
 
 
 4 In a pre-removal risk assessment under sections 97, 112 and 113 of the IRPA, protection may be afforded to a person who, upon removal from Canada to their country of nationality, would be subject to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment. 
 
 
 
 5 In my view, it was an error in law for the immigration officer to have concluded that she was not required to deal with risk factors in her assessment of the humanitarian and compassionate application. She should not have closed her mind to risk factors even though a valid negative pre-removal risk assessment may have been made. There may well be risk considerations which are relevant to an application for permanent residence from within Canada which fall well below the higher threshold of risk to life or cruel and unusual punishment. 
 
 
 
 (See also, the Chief Justice in  
 Liyanage v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2005] F.C.J. No. 1293, 2005 FC 1045 at paragraph 41. For an excellent analysis see Madam Danièle Tremblay-Lamer in  
 Sha'er v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2007] F.C.J. No. 297, 2007 FC 231 at paragraph 7)