[11]
Credibility was not an issue. Indeed, the Board accepts that the two incidents of sexual and physical assaults did occur. However, the Board made the following findings:
a) There is
adequate state protection
for the claimant in Buenos Aires. The decision states as follows:
"[...] (T)he claimant's failure to diligently seek protection in his country of origin does not provide clear and convincing evidence to rebut the presumption that the constitutional democracy of Argentina can protect its citizens. [...]
"There are laws enforcing the rights of homosexuals in Buenos Aires and the documentary evidence notes that there are laws in place protecting people including homosexuals from discrimination in employment, property rights and many supportive and active non-governmental agencies supporting homosexuals. [...]
"[...] There are several references in the documentary evidence that refer to Buenos Aires and Rosario as leaders in Argentina in their acceptance of homosexuals. The documentary evidence also states that there have been issues between the police and some homosexuals during protests and at gay bars; however, these have not been addressed as problems by Amnesty International. CHA [(Homosexual Community Argentina)] was founded in 1984 and gained official recognition in 1992 and Argentina celebrated its first Gay Pride week in 1992. I find it is reasonable that the claimant could live openly and support himself with no more than a mere possibility of persecution in Buenos Aires."
b) The
consolidated grounds
of risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment or to danger of torture must necessarily fail because it is established that there is adequate state protection for the applicant in Buenos Aires.
c) There are no
compelling reasons
including the two incidents of 1998 and 2002 in Argentina that would warrant according refugee protection to the applicant. The decision notes in particular:
"The claimant has been absent from Argentina for a period of four and one-half (4-½) years and I rely [on] the current documentary evidence. I find that the problems experienced in 1998 and 2002 in Argentina, by the claimant, were neither so appalling nor atrocious that he would be found to be in need of refugee protection based on compelling reasons."