[14]
The standard of review applicable to a determination of state protection has been established by this Court as that of reasonableness simpliciter, as analyzed by my colleague Justice Carolyn Layden-Stevenson at paragraphs 9 to 11 of
Chaves v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [2005] F.T.R. Uned. 115; [2005] F.C.J. No. 232; 2005 FC 193:
"i) The Standard of Review
"9. The four contextual factors comprising the pragmatic and functional approach, which potentially overlap, are: 'the presence or absence of a privative clause or statutory right of appeal; the expertise of the tribunal relative to that of the reviewing court on the issue in question; the purposes of the legislation and the provision in particular; and the nature of the question - law, fact, or mixed law and fact' (
Dr. Q
, supra, at para. 26).
"10. Turning to the first of those factors, decisions of the Board are not protected by a strong privative clause (see
Pushpanathan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 982). The second and third factors, however, militate in favour of curial deference. Whether state protection is available, or whether the claimant has sought that protection, engages the relative expertise of the RPD. And though the provision in question in effect requires a determination of the rights of individuals claiming refugee status, the legislation gives substantial discretion to the RPD.
"11. However, the nature of the question is key in this application and also brings into play relative expertise. Deciding whether a particular claimant has rebutted the presumption of state protection involves 'applying a legal standard [i.e. "clear and convincing confirmation of a state's inability to protect":
Ward
, supra, at para. 50] to a set of facts', which according to the Supreme Court constitutes a question of mixed fact and law:
Housen v. Nikolaisen
, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235 at para. 26. The RPD has relative expertise with respect to the findings of fact and assessing country conditions. However, the Court has relative expertise with respect to whether the legal standard was met. Accordingly, the appropriate standard of review is in my view reasonableness simpliciter. This is consistent with the rulings characterizing the issue of state protection as a question of mixed fact and law:
Smith
, supra, and
Racz
, supra.
"12. Briefly, before considering whether the RPD appropriately decided whether the applicant demonstrated the state's inability to protect, it is useful to describe what constitutes an unreasonable decision, as explained by the Supreme Court in
Law Society of New Brunswick v. Ryan
, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 247:
'55. A decision will be unreasonable only if there is no line of analysis within the given reasons that could reasonably lead the tribunal from the evidence before it to the conclusion at which it arrived. If any of the reasons that are sufficient to support the conclusion are tenable in the sense that they can stand up to a somewhat probing examination, then the decision will not be unreasonable and a reviewing court must not interfere (see
Southam
, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 748, at para. 56). This means that a decision may satisfy the reasonableness standard if it is supported by a tenable explanation even if this explanation is not one that the reviewing court finds compelling (see
Southam
, at para. 79).'"