[18]
The decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in Sharma v Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness), 2016 FCA 319, 274 ACWS 3d 382, is also instructive on the scope of the discretion available to the Officer and the Delegate in the exercise of their s 44 authority.  Mr. Sharma was a permanent resident who faced an admissibility hearing on the ground of criminality.  The Court recognized that the Officer and the Delegate had “some flexibility when deciding whether or not to write an admissibility report” but their discretion was said to be “very limited” with respect to both foreign nationals and permanent residents.  Beyond observing that a permanent resident may be entitled to “a somewhat higher level of participatory rights” the decision does not identify a broader substantive discretion favouring that class of residents.  Indeed, the Court applied the security rationale from its earlier decision in Cha, above, to Mr. Sharma saying that it applied with equal force to foreign nationals and permanent residents [see para 23].  The decision described the very limited purpose served by the s 44 process in the following way:
[33]  The case review of recommendations prior to the public danger opinion or the internal risk opinion triggered by a humanitarian application are of a different nature and cannot be analogized to the report and the referral envisaged by subsections 44(1) and (2). I agree with the respondent that the inadmissibility report and the case highlights are more in the nature of pro forma documents, whose essential purpose is to list relevant information from the file (revolving around the criminal conviction and related objective facts) and to provide a brief rationale for the Officer’s actions and recommendation. They are clearly distinguishable from case review recommendations in the context of public danger opinion and internal risk opinions, which are more akin to advocacy tools.
…
[37]  …Yet, as previously noted, the decisions to make a report and to refer it to the ID are administrative in nature, and do not translate to any change in status for the appellant. Only the ID can make a removal order in this case, and the appellant has a number of other recourses available to him before actually being removed from the country (applications for judicial review of the report, of the referral and of the ID decisions, a pre-removal risk assessment, and an H&C application)…