[1]
Cullen, J.
: The style of cause in this case is amended to show the Secretary of State of Canada as respondent.
[2]
This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration Commission, dated April 30, 1993, in which it was determined that the applicant, a citizen of Ghana, did not have sufficient humanitarian and compassionate ("H & C") grounds to be landed, i.e., to be a permanent resident. The respondent has consented to an order in the nature of certiorari to set aside the decision and refer the matter back for redetermination of the issue of the sufficiency of the applicant's H & C grounds.
[3]
However, the applicant seeks an order in the nature of mandamus directing the Commission to grant due consideration to the applicant for landing or, in the alternative, an order in the nature of mandamus that the applicant be landed. Essentially, the applicant seeks an order directing the Commission to process the applicant's claim pursuant to the
Refugee Claimant's Designated Class Regulations
, SOR/90-40 Am. SOR/92-13 ("the Backlog provisions"), his case having already been held to have a credible basis under s. 46.01(7) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 ("the
Act
") as it stood before the amendments of S.C. 1992, c. 49 ("
Bill C-86
").
Facts
[4]
The applicant is a citizen of Ghana who arrived in Canada on January 7, 1988, and made a claim for refugee status. His claim was processed pursuant to the Backlog provisions. On August 18, 1992, the applicant was informed by letter (exhibit A to the applicant's affidavits sworn 20 August 1993) from the Toronto Refugee Backlog CIC that the Minister's representative had formed the opinion that his claim had a credible basis and that such opinion would be forwarded to a panel consisting of an adjudicator and a member of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (CRDD). This panel would process his application for permanent residence, providing he was eligible. The applicant was further informed that he would have to meet statutory requirements such as a medical examination and a background check.
[5]
By letter dated August 28, 1992, the applicant was invited to a prelanding interview at the Refugee Backlog office (Exhibit "A" to the affidavit of Katherine Goldy-Hajsaniuk). He attended on September 14, 1992, and paid the administrative fee of $350 for the processing of his application. He also provided the Immigration Officer with a completed application for permanent residence ("Form IMM8", Exhibit "B" to the Goldy-Hajsaniuk affidavit) on which he indicated that he had never been convicted of an offence in any country. At this point, he assumed that his landing application was completed (applicant's affidavit, para. 6).
[6]
On July 22, 1992, the applicant was summarily convicted of the offence of drinking and driving. In the course of the routine security and criminal activity check conducted pursuant to the Backlog provisions, the Commission became aware of the applicant's criminal conviction and because he failed to disclose this information on his application for landing, his file was transferred to the Criminality Review Unit of the Toronto Refugee Backlog CIC for further assessment.
[7]
In the meantime, on February 1, 1993, the provisions of the
Act
were changed, specifically s. 19(2)(a) which rendered the applicant criminally inadmissible by virtue of his summary conviction. Section 19(2)(a) of the
Act
, as it stood before the February 1, 1993 amendments read:. Before the amendments, it read, in part:
"(2) No immigrant and, except as provided in subsection (3), no visitor shall be granted admission if the immigrant or visitor is a member of any of the following classes:
(a) persons who have been convicted of an offence that, if committed in Canada, constitutes or, if committed outside Canada, would constitute an offence that may be punishable by way of indictment under any other Act of Parliament and for which a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years may be imposed, except persons who have satisfied the Minister that they have rehabilitated themselves and that ..."
Subsequent to the amendments of the
Act
under
Bill C-86
, and particularly s. 11(5), this provision now reads in part:
"(2) No immigrant and, except as provided in subsection (3), no visitor shall be granted admission if the immigrant or visitor is a member of any of the following classes:
(a) persons who have been convicted in Canada of an indictable offence, or of an offence for which the offender may be prosecuted by indictment or for which the offender is punishable on summary conviction, that may be punishable by way of indictment under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years;"
[8]
The applicant was made the subject of a s. 27 report in which he was deemed criminally inadmissible for landing in Canada (see Exhibit "D" to the Goldy-Hajsaniuk affidavit). Thereafter, the applicant was called for another H & C interview to determine if there were sufficient grounds which warranted granting the applicant an exemption from the normal visa requirements.
[9]
The applicant attended the interview on March 18, 1993, and was informed at that time that his application looked favourable. However, on further review, and especially after receiving further third party information which indicated that the applicant might have fabricated some of his supporting documentation, the hearing officer, Ms. Goldy-Hajsaniuk, determined that she would not make a positive H & C determination. The applicant was advised of this decision by letter dated April 30, 1993. On August 19, 1993, Robin Black, Senior Immigration Officer met with the applicant's counsel and informed her that the Commission would conduct a third H & C review of the applicant's case to remedy obvious procedural errors in the first review. This led to the respondent's consent to the reconsideration of the matter in this judicial review. As mentioned earlier, however, the applicant still seeks an order that his claim be processed according to the Backlog provisions, as if the criminally inadmissibility requirements of the
Act
had not changed.
Analysis
[10]
The applicant argues that the letter informing him of the Minister's opinion regarding his credible basis, the landing papers, the prelanding interview and the receipt of his administrative fee created a legitimate expectation in him that he would be found to have a credible basis and therefore approved for landing, absent any grounds which made him inadmissible. Further, he argues that had the matter been handled expeditiously, he would not have been criminally inadmissible because his summary conviction was not a bar to landing under the
Act
at the time his application was being processed under the Backlog provisions. Therefore, he submits that an order declaring him landed should issue. He submits that, in the alternative, he should be placed on the special Minister's list to receive a Minister's permit with other applicants approved for landing who became criminally inadmissible with the changes in the legislation.
[11]
The doctrine of legitimate expectation was clearly set out in
Bendahmane v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1989] 3 F.C. 16; 95 N.R. 385; 8 Imm. L.R.(2d) 20 (F.C.A.), at p. 27 [Imm. L.R. (2d)], where, in reviewing the Privy Council decision in
Hong Kong (Attorney General) v. Ng Yuen Shiu
, [1983] 2 A.C. 629 (P.C.), Mr. Justice Hugessen stated:
"Lord Fraser of Tullybelton put the matter thus:
'when a public authority has promised to follow a certain procedure, it is in the interest of good administration that it should act fairly and should implement its promise, so long as implementation does not interfere with its statutory duty. The principle is also justified by the further consideration that, when the promise was made, the authority must have considered that it would be assisted in discharging its duty fairly by any representations from interested parties and as a general rule that it is correct.
'In the opinion of their Lordships the principle that a public authority is bound by its undertakings as to the procedure it will follow, provided they do not conflict with its duty, is applicable to the undertaking given by the Government of Hong Kong to the applicant, along with other illegal immigrants from Macau, in the announcement outside the Government House on October 28, that each case would be considered on its merits.' (At p. 638.)"
[12]
Therefore, the question to be answered is: did the Commission promise to process the applicant for landing according to the Backlog provisions, (and I would add, if so) has the Commission deviated from that promise unfairly and to the detriment of the applicant.
[13]
The Commission informed the applicant that he was to be processed according to the Backlog provisions and had begun to process him as such, to the point of accepting his landing application fee and conducting the prelanding interview. This may certainly have led him to believe that he would be processed according to those provisions. However, even the applicant concedes that the Commission was clear that his application was subject to standard background checks, including a security check for criminal activity. When it discovered that he had lied on the landing application and actually had a criminal conviction in Canada, the Commission took the routine step of transferring the file to the Criminality Unit. Indeed, if a promise was made, could this transfer of his file, and particularly the subsequent inactivity on the file until after the change in the legislation, be considered an unfair deviation from the implementation of that promise? At this point I am not convinced that it is.
[14]
The applicant relies on the decision of
Demirtas v. Minister of Employment and Immigration et al.
, [1991] 3 F.C. 489; 47 F.T.R. 139; 15 Imm. L.R.(2d) 144 (T.D.), in which the judge applied the doctrine of legitimate expectation to hold in favour of the applicant, despite the wording of the legislation which was contrary to the Minister's announcement affecting the applicant. However, that reasoning was expressly overturned by the Court of Appeal (reported, [1993] 1 F.C. 602; 149 N.R. 375). The Court of Appeal held that the doctrine of legitimate expectations did not operate because the Minister's announcement did not amount to a promise by an administrative authority. Further, the court held that the doctrine could not operate in the face of a statutory bar to the actions or procedure promised to the applicant.
[15]
In the case at bar, and even assuming there was a promise from an administrative authority, I feel that it is barred by a legislative enactment, namely the transition provisions provided in
Bill C-86
and specifically s. 109 which states:
"109. Subject to sections 110 to 120, every provision of the Immigration Act as enacted by this Act shall, on the coming into force of that provision, apply in respect of every application, proceeding or matter under that Act or the regulations made thereunder that is pending or in progress immediately before the coming into force of that provision."
Thus, for applications pending at the commencement date, the new provisions of the
Act
are to apply. In my opinion, because of the transfer to the Criminality Unit, the applicant's file was not yet complete and the transition provisions seem to apply. It should be noted, as the applicant argues, that had the Commission acted expeditiously, his application would have been approved because his summary conviction was not a bar under the old provisions.
[16]
I have reexamined my decision in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, in which I held that the change in the legislation at issue there could not operate to the detriment of the applicant, where the respondent Commission could not show that the delay in processing the final procedural step was legitimate in the face of an otherwise complete and valid claim. The difference with the case at bar is that here the applicant's application was incomplete, by virtue of the false declaration made on his application for landing and the transfer to the Criminality Unit. As it was pending, the transition provision applies and the applicant request for mandamus must be denied.
[17]
This appeal is allowed in part and on consent the matter is referred back to a different Immigration Officer for redetermination of the issue of sufficiency of the applicant's H & C grounds. The Officer is instructed that the matter of the drinking and driving has already been determined and would not nor should not be a bar to a favourable H & C finding. Quoting from the argument of counsel for the applicant at p. 12 of the transcript:
"She reviewed with my client, Mr. Owusu-Baidoo, the documentation he submitted showing his work background and despite the conviction for drunken driving she decided that she should -- that she would give a positive recommendation that he be landed on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. And she communicated this to him verbally. That's [what] we hadn't had acknowledged from her prior to the cross-examination. That's on page 13 of her cross-examination, number 63.
"Maybe she put it in her affidavit. But she acknowledges that she communicated to him verbally that she was going to give a positive recommendation.
. . . . .
"She conducted the interview with Mr. Owusu-Baidoo on March 18th. She believed that she received this information in a written letter from somebody whose name she is not giving us on March 24th. And she won't tell me how she was able to confirm the reliability of this information because her counsel says, 'We don't have to tell you our confidential sources', and so on. That's at the bottom of page 15.
"And then she acknowledges again, on the next page, 'I was going to make a positive recommendation which could easily have been overturned but I never said he was going to be landed.'"
[18]
But again quoting counsel for the applicant at pp. 12-13 of the transcript:
"Then she says on the next page, page 14 number 70, that between that time and giving her written approval, this is a quote, 'I received information from a third party that there was a possibility that supporting documentation that was presented at the humanitarian and compassionate interview was actually fabricated and that they were not originals.'"
[19]
The Immigration Officer should examine this factor and determine whether there are sufficient grounds to deny a favourable H & C finding. The Officer must determine if there is any basis for the third party allegations and its adoption by Ms. Goldy-Hajsaniuk. I can appreciate that the name of the informant may very well have to be kept secret to protect the informant but certainly the respondent has to make a better case outlining the alleged fabrication to the applicant so that the applicant has an opportunity to respond.
[20]
It will of course be up to the applicant to decide whether or not to pursue this case in light of my finding that the decision was not complete but pending and so he is caught within the transition provisions. It would seem to me that if the applicant is able to secure a favourable H & C decision, then it is a text book case for an application seeking a Minister's permit.
[21]
Thus the appeal is allowed and the matter is referred back to a different Immigration Officer. Beyond the reasons set out above, no specific directions are given for the redetermination of this matter.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/nmg
[End of document]
