[21]
As in the
Nueda
case, all of the information that the Applicants chose to put forward was before Officer Bauly. The Applicants were aware of young Rafal's medical condition and its relevance to a humanitarian and compassionate review as is evidenced by their solicitor's letter dated the 1st day of April, 1991. At the urging of Officer Bauly, they submitted a copy of Dr. Golda's report by fax on the 16th day of April, 1992. It was considered. It was not ignored. As in the
Nueda
case, the Applicants may not and obviously do not agree with Officer Bauly's treatment of the medical report, but it was considered and the advice provided to Officer Bauly by the physician that was available to her was conveyed to the Applicants solicitors. It had, for many months, been open to them to supplement Dr. Golda's report with further medical opinion and with expert opinion regarding medical expertise, services and facilities available in Poland and environmental conditions in that country and their relationship to Rafal's condition. They knew that it was important to present for Officer Bauly's consideration the whole of their case. They appear not to have done so. To suggest, in such circumstances that the Respondent failed to respect the duty to act fairly by failing to disclose the case that the Applicants had to meet was essentially to suggest that the Respondent had a duty to prescribe to the Applicants what it would take to make out their case. I find there is no such duty on the Respondent. The Respondent agreed to reopen the issue of humanitarian and compassionate considerations when there was no obligation to do so. An oral hearing was rejected when no notice had been given of the desire to make oral representations, but it was indicated that written representations would be considered. When these submissions were not forthcoming within a reasonable time, the Respondent reached out to the Applicants to remind them. All submissions provided were considered. Professional advice was solicited and considered. The decision was communicated to the Applicants solicitors and the opportunity to once again bolster the Applicants case was rejected. In all of the circumstances of this case, I conclude that the duty to act fairly was respected.
2. Was The Decision Reasonable
On The Evidence Before The
Immigration Officer?