[17]
Nor is the argument of the plaintiff supported by the jurisprudence of this court. Rule 202(1) was interpreted in
Fredericton Housing v. R.
, [1973] F.C. 196 (T.D.), appeal dismissed without discussion on this point [1973] F.C. 681 (F.C.A.), in which this court held that a document is not filed until duly stamped by a clerk of the Registry. The issue as to whether
intention
to appeal, as indicated by the date of mailing, is sufficient to constitute proper "filing" or whether physical receipt of the document by the Registry is required was addressed in
Sharma v. Minister of National Revenue
(1994), 74 F.T.R. 312 (T.D.), at 315-316. In that case, addressing the plaintiff's argument that filing her statement of claim with the respondent Minister rather than in the Registry was sufficient to constitute "filing" within the meaning of the
Act
(and thereby qualifying within the 90 day time limit under s. 135), I stated:
"... The plaintiff did not file the statement of claim to initiate her appeal of the Minister's decision within the time limited by statute. Under the
Act
, s. 135(2) provides that the
Federal Court Act
and the
Federal Court Rules
applicable to ordinary actions shall apply to actions initiated to appeal the Minister's decision. Rule 400 provides that 'an action shall be commenced by filing an originating document, which may be called a statement of claim or a declaration' and under rule 2(1) 'file' is defined as meaning 'file in the Registry' of the court. That occurred in this case when the plaintiff's statement of claim was filed in the Registry on September 29, 1993. The intention to file the appeal within the time limited, as may appear from the filing of a copy of the statement of claim with Revenue Canada Excise in Hamilton on September 17, did not constitute initiation of the appeal nor did the letter dated September 21, 1993 but received only on September 29. Only filing of the statement of claim in the court's registry institutes an appeal. That was done only on September 29, more than a week after the time limited for appealing the matter had elapsed." (Emphasis added)