 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laurore Jean v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2010), 371 F.T.R. 163 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2010] F.T.R. TBEd. JN.033 
 
 
 
 Leonie Laurore Jean, Apoline Laurore, Oniste Laurore (demandeurs) v. Le Ministre de la Citoyeneté et de l'Immigration (défendeur) 
 
 (IMM-5860-09; 2010 CF 674; 2010 FC 674) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Laurore Jean et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Shore, J. 
 
 June 22, 2010. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 In 1994, the applicants (a mother and her two daughters) left Haiti for the U.S., where they claimed asylum. The claim was denied. In 2007, the applicants left the U.S. for Canada, where they claimed refugee protection. The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found that the applicants were not Convention refugees under s. 96 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) or "persons in need of protection" under s. 97 of the IRPA. The applicants sought judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the application. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 163 
 
 Classification of aliens - Refugees - What constitutes a refugee - In 1994, the applicants (a mother and her two daughters) left Haiti for the U.S., where they claimed asylum - The claim was denied - In 2007, the applicants left the U.S. for Canada, where they claimed refugee protection on the basis that they feared criminality in Haiti, including kidnappings and ransom, and feared being targeted specifically because they might be perceived as having greater financial means given that they had lived abroad for many years - The Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found that the applicants were not Convention refugees under s. 96 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) or "persons in need of protection" under s. 97 of the IRPA - There was no evidence of any personal risk and personalized fear on the part of the applicants - The applicants sought judicial review - The Federal Court dismissed the application - Regarding s. 96, the alleged fear had no connection to a Convention ground - Regarding s. 97, a generalized fear of crime caused by a situation prevailing throughout the country and affecting the entire population did not justify granting the status of a person in need of protection - The court rejected the argument that the two children were a particular group and a "group apart" - The alleged fear had no connection with age - Further, the age of a person was not an "innate or unchangeable" characteristic that created a "particular social group" - The documentary evidence supported the Board's conclusion that everyone was a target in Haiti - There was no reversible error - See paragraphs 16 to 50. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1314 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Persons in need of protection - General (incl. what constitutes) (IRPA, s. 97) - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 163 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1322 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - Grounds - Well-founded fear of persecution - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 163 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1323.1 
 
 Admission - Refugee protection, Convention refugees and persons in need of protection - "Particular social group" defined - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 163 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
 Tanis v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 276; 2010 FC 420, refd to. [para. 1]. 
 
 Octave v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2009), 346 F.T.R. 103; 2009 FC 403, refd to. [para. 2]. 
 
 Michaud v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2009), 351 F.T.R. 290; 2009 FC 886, refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
 Lozandier v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 478; 2009 FC 770, refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
 Guerilus et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 231; 2010 FC 394, refd to. [para. 15]. 
 
 Saint-Hilaire v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 109; 2010 FC 178, refd to. [para. 15]. 
 
 Soimin v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 137; 2009 FC 218, refd to. [para. 24]. 
 
 Prophète v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2008] F.T.R. Uned. 230; 167 A.C.W.S(3d) 151; 2008 FC 331, refd to. [para. 31]. 
 
 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689; 153 N.R. 321, refd to. [para. 40]. 
 
 Sermot v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 708; 2009 FC 1105, refd to. [para. 47]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Luc R. Desmarais, for the applicants; 
 
 Mireille-Anne Rainville, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Luc R. Desmarais, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicants; 
 
 Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This application was heard at Montreal, Quebec, on June 8, 2010, by Shore, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following reasons for judgment on June 22, 2010. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I.  
 Preliminary 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Shore, J. 
  [Translation]: "...  
 the Haitian diaspora as a whole cannot be considered a [translation] 'risk group' and that each case must be considered individually and within [translation] 'its own context 
 .' He also indicated, however, that the characteristics of members of the diaspora [language and different behaviour in public] make them [translation] 'a group apart' that [translation] 'stands out' more and is [translation] 'targeted more by kidnappers' (UAPC 27 Sept. 2007)." 
 
 
 
 As specified "[i]n correspondence sent to the Research Directorate on 27 September 2007, a legal and human rights expert from the Canadian Cooperation Support Program Unit in Haiti (Unité d'appui au programme de la coopération canadienne à Haïti, UAPC) stated ..." ( 
 Tanis v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 276; [2010] F.C.J. No. 501; 2010 FC 420. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  "[8] The authorities are thoroughly reviewed by Mr. Justice Beaudry in  
 Cius v. Canada 
  ( 
 Minister of Citizenship and Immigration 
 ), 2008 FC 1, [2008] F.C.J No. 9 (QL). He rejected the argument that people returning to Haiti formed part of a 'particular social group' as defined by the Supreme Court of Canada in  
 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward 
 , [1993] 2 S.C.R 689, 20 Imm. L.R.(2d) 85. Thus, Mr. Octave cannot be considered a refugee within the meaning of section 96 of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection  
 Act 
 ." 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Octave v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
  (2009), 346 F.T.R. 103; 2009 FC 403). 
 
 
 
 II.  
 Judicial proceeding 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  On October 15, 2008, the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) found that the applicants, two citizens of Haiti and one American citizen, were not "Convention refugees" within the meaning of section 96 of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection  
 Act 
 , S.C. 2001 c. 27 ( 
 IRPA 
 ) or "persons in need of protection" within the meaning of section 97 of the  
 IRPA 
 , and accordingly rejected their claims for refugee protection. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  This decision was based on the absence of evidence of any personal risk and personalized fear on the part of the applicants. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  The applicants challenged the Board's decision by way of an Application for Leave and for Judicial Review under subsection 72(1) of the  
 IRPA 
 . 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The application for leave was granted. 
 
 
 
 III.  
 Preliminary remarks 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  The principal applicant, Leonie Laurore Jean, discusses a finding of a lack of credibility at paragraphs 8 to 12 of her affidavit. The respondent argues that the Board made no findings with respect to her credibility. 
 
 
 
 IV.  
 Background 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The applicants, a mother and her two daughters, allege that they fear criminality in Haiti: kidnappings and demands for ransom. They fear being targeted specifically because they might be perceived as having greater financial means given that they lived abroad for many years. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  In December 1994, the applicants left Haiti for the United States. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Four years later, in 1998, the two applicants from Haiti claimed asylum in the United States. Their claim was allegedly denied in 1999. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  On October 18, 2007, the applicants left the United States for Canada. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The refugee claim hearing took place on September 30, 2008, while the applicants were represented by their current counsel. 
 
 
 
 V.  
 Issues 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  (1) Does the Board's decision contain irregularities that would warrant this Court's intervention? 
 
 
 
 (2) More specifically, are the Board's findings regarding the lack of personal risk and personalized fear unreasonable or unfounded in the evidence? 
 
 
 
 VI.  
 Analysis 
 
 
 
 Standard of review 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The Board's analysis of the applicants' situation under section 96 of the  
 IRPA 
  and of whether there was a connection between their alleged fear and one of the grounds of the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, adopted on July 28, 1951, by the United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless Persons convened under General Assembly resolution 429 (V) of December 14, 1950, is reviewable on the standard of reasonableness ( 
 Michaud v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
  (2009), 351 F.T.R. 290; 2009 FC 886 at paras. 28-29;  
 Lozandier v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 478; [2009] F.C.J. No. 931; 2009 FC 770 at para. 17). 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Similarly, the assessment of the applicants' personalized risk under section 97 of the  
 IRPA 
  is reviewable on the standard of reasonableness ( 
 Guerilus et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 231; [2010] F.C.J. No. 438; 2010 FC 394 at para. 9;  
 Saint-Hilaire v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2010] F.T.R. Uned. 109; 2010 FC 178 at para. 12). 
 
 
 
 Section 96 of the IRPA is not applicable 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  The Board stated that section 96 of the  
 IRPA 
  does not apply since the alleged fear of a situation of insecurity and widespread criminality has no connection to a Convention ground (Certified Tribunal Record (CTR) at para. 11). 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  Section 96 of the  
 IRPA 
  reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 "96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion, 
 
 
 
 (a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or ..." 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  The Court is in agreement with the respondent's position. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  In this case, the evidence and the applicant's testimony clearly showed to the Board that she feared the widespread criminality in Haiti in relation to the fact that she had lived abroad. As the transcript of the hearing indicates: 
 
 
 
 (Translation) 
 
 
 
 "Q.: Ma'am, can you tell me who you are afraid of if you return to your country? 
 
 A: Not really, because there are a number of groups. If I return-that's when they kidnap people. So they take people, they take them to another location and they kill them. That's why I don't want to return. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 Q.: And why would you be a target? 
 
 
 
 A.: The mere fact that you're coming from a foreign country, so it's-people will figure out that you're a member of the diaspora. They always want money, so they'll kidnap you. They'll ask for $100,000, $200,000. And if you don't find the $200,000, they will kill you. 
 
 (CTR at p. 185: (Transcript (T))." 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The Board dismissed the applicants' allegation that they would be targeted as members of the Haitian diaspora, because it is not a particular social group (Tribunal decision at paras. 14-15). 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  It was for the Board to determine whether the applicants' fear was related to a Convention ground: 
 
 
 
 "[17] The question of the existence of a connection between the alleged persecution and one of the Convention grounds is mostly a question of fact that therefore falls within the RPD's expertise ( 
 Rizkallah 
 , above;  
 Pour-Shariati v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) 
  (1997), 215 N.R. 174 (F.C.A.)). Consequently, the RPD was entitled to find that the applicant's fear was not a result of her gender but a result of the fact that she had been the victim of a crime, and it was therefore entitled to deny her claim under section 96 of the  
 IRPA 
 ." 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Lozandier 
 , above). 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  Having analyzed the documentary evidence, the Board states that the evidence shows that the entire population is targeted by criminality and that men, women and children can all be victims (Tribunal decision at para. 12). 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  In fact, that is what the evidence shows: 
 
 
 
 " 
 Groups targeted by kidnappers 
 
 
 
 Sources indicate that kidnappers in Haiti  
 generally act opportunistically (US 9 Jan. 2007, 'Overall Crime and Safety Situation'; 
   
 The Miami Herald 
   
 2 Nov. 2004) and do not choose their victims according to nationality, race, gender or age (US Fed News 31 Aug 2007; US 9 Jan. 2007, 'Overall Crime and Safety Situation'). Anyone who appears to be wealthy risks being a victim of kidnapping for ransom 
  (ibid.;  
 The Miami Herald 
  2 Nov. 2004). However, although all the victims of kidnapping for ransom in 2004 reported by  
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2004 
  were wealthy people (US 28 Feb. 2005, Sec. 1.b), the victims of kidnapping for ransom came from all levels of society in 2005 (ibid. 8 Mar. 2006, Sec. 1.b; AI 23 May 2006) and in 2006 (US 6 Mar. 2007, Sec. 1.b). According to the  
 Washington Post 
 , the threat of kidnapping also hangs over street vendors ..." 
 
 
 
 (CTR at p. 16: Responses to Information Requests, February 14, 2008; CTR at p. 23: Responses to Information Requests, October 15, 2007). 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  Moreover, it is well established that fear of criminal harm has no connection to a Convention ground. This is exactly the nature of the applicants' fear in this case. As this Court recently pointed out: 
 
 
 
 "[14] The violence feared by the applicant arises from general criminal activity in Haiti, and not the discriminatory targeting of women in particular. The harm feared is criminal in nature and has no nexus to the Convention refugee definition. The generalized risk of a situation in a country must be distinguished from the probable risk to a person on the basis of his or her particular circumstances. 
 
 
 
 "[15] At the hearing, the applicant herself admitted that in [translation] 'Haiti, everyone is scared' and that women or people like her who travel to Canada are not more likely to be specifically attacked; all Haitians, both men and women, she agrees, fear kidnappings and rape." 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Soimin v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 137; [2006] F.C.J. No. 246; 2009 FC 218). 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  Clearly, then, the Board did not err in concluding that the alleged fear had no connection to a Convention ground and that section 96 of the  
 IRPA 
  did not apply. 
 
 
 
 Section 97 of the IRPA is not applicable 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  The Board then analyzed the general situation in Haiti. The evidence indicates that insecurity is rampant throughout the country. Having reviewed the documentary evidence, the Board found that  
 the entire population is targeted and that the situation of people who have lived abroad is no different from that of other Haitians with greater financial means 
 . (Tribunal decision at paras. 16-18; CTR at p. 16: Responses to Information Requests, February 14, 2008; CTR at p. 23: Responses to Information Requests, October 15, 2007). 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  Since the applicants did not submit any evidence showing that they could face a personalized risk that the general public would not, the Board found that the risk was generalized and random (Tribunal decision at para. 22). 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  As the transcript of the hearing indicates: 
 
 
 
 (Translation) 
 
 
 
 "Q.: Okay. So that means that you really don't know who, in the end. It could be anyone. 
 
 
 
 A.: Correct. So I don't know who exactly. It could be anyone. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 Q.: Are there other things that make you afraid to return to your country? 
 
 
 
 A.: Other than that, nothing. Because it is really the situation of life there, the fact that there are killings, that they kill people. The fact that they do cruel things to people. 
 
 
 
 Q.: Okay. So, if I understand correctly, if you were to return to your country today, what you're afraid of is the prevailing situation of insecurity and crime. 
 
 
 
 A.: Yes." (Emphasis added.) 
 
 
 
 (CTR at pp. 185-186: T of the hearing). 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  There is no doubt that the applicants have no fear of personalized risk. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  Therefore, it was completely open to the Board to find that the applicants would not be personally targeted and that, accordingly, section 97 of the  
 IRPA 
  did not apply: 
 
 
 
 "97(1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally ..." 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  This conclusion was perfectly reasonable and consistent with the teachings of this Court. In fact, as recently stated: 
 
 
 
 "[21]  
 In short, the risk that the applicant is alleging is a random risk faced generally and indiscriminately by everybody living in her country 
 ; it does not target the applicant personally or specifically. The situation that the applicant fears being exposed to does not differ from that of other people living in her country;  
 she is therefore not a person in need of protection, as defined in subparagraph 97(1)(b)(ii) 
  of the  
 IRPA 
 . 
 
 
 
 "[22] Such a situation does not give rise to a personal risk justifying the protection sought by the applicant. The RPD found that the alleged harm was criminal in nature without any connection to the definition of Convention refugee, and this was a finding that it could legitimately make ( 
 Jeudy v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2005 FC 1124;  
 Cius v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2008 FC 1). 
 
 
 
 "[23] The Court, after analyzing the facts and the impugned decision, finds that the RPD was correct in deciding that the applicant did not establish that she was a person in need of protection under sections 96 and 97 of the  
 IRPA 
 , when this burden of proof was hers to discharge.  
 The Court must therefore respect the RPD's decision 
  (The Court's emphasis)." 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Lozandier 
 , above;  
 Guerilus 
 , above;  
 Saint-Hilaire 
 , above;  
 Prophète v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2008] F.T.R. Uned. 230; 167 A.C.W.S(3d) 151; 2008 FC 331 at paras. 22-23). 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  The case law of this Court is clear and consistent that a generalized fear of crime caused by a situation prevailing throughout the country and affecting the entire population is not enough to justify granting the status of person in need of protection. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  An applicant must establish that there is a personalized risk based on his or her personal circumstances, which was not done in this case: the applicants did not show that their particular situation would cause a personalized risk, and the documentary evidence does not support their allegations. 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  In their written submissions, the applicants argue that children are a particular social group and a "group apart", and that it would be unrealistic for the applicant to leave her children behind should she be returned to Haiti. The children were born in 1994 in Haiti and in 1999 in the United States, respectively (CTR at pp. 42 and 54: Personal Information Form (PIF)). 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  First, the wording of sections 96 and 97 of the  
 IRPA 
  is very clear that the review should be conducted with reference to the applicant's country of  
 nationality 
 . 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  Therefore, for the child who is an American citizen, the review could not be conducted with reference to Haiti. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  Second, it is interesting to note the submissions made by counsel for the applicants during the hearing before the Board: 
 
 
 
 (Translation) 
 
 
 
 "Q.: Are you ready to make your submissions? 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 A.: I will leave it to your discretion. It is unusual for me to do this, but you see, there is clearly a problem here ... 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 But in any case, the applicant alleges today that her real fear is of the kidnappers, of general insecurity. And given the case law on this topic, I will not dwell on it any longer. No evidence will be submitted against the United States for-one of the two children is American. The only thing may be-you know-because it was already decided by one of your colleagues, but that was some time ago. And that, despite the case law in  
 Étienne et compagnie 
 , this is a case where-and here I'm speaking of the child who was born in Haiti, in other words, Oniste-she arrived in the United States as an infant. Therefore, clearly, she does not remember-she was raised mainly in the United States, plus two years here. The family unit's return to Haiti, the fact that the child is visibly more American than Haitian, probably in her manner of speaking, dressing, etc., could result in the entire family being specifically targeted. 
 
 
 
 But I will not dwell on this point ..." 
 
 
 
 (CTR at pp. 201-203: Submissions made by counsel at the hearing). 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  It is clear that the argument regarding the children was submitted to show that the applicants could possibly be more easily identifiable as members of the Haitian diaspora having lived abroad. Age (the applicant is 16 years old) was never alleged before the Board as being a source of fear. 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  Therefore, the fear has no connection with age and, accordingly, the argument on the basis of children as a particular social group is without merit. 
 
 
 
 [40] 
  According to the teachings of the Supreme Court of Canada in  
 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward 
 , [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689; 153 N.R. 321, three categories of groups can be recognized as a "particular social group": 
 
 
 
 "The meaning assigned to 'particular social group' in the  
 Act 
  should take into account the general underlying themes of the defence of human rights and anti-discrimination that form the basis for the international refugee protection initiative. The tests proposed in  
 Mayers 
 , supra,  
 Cheung 
 , supra, and  
 Matter of Acosta 
 , supra, provide a good working rule to achieve this result. They identify three possible categories: 
 
 
 
 (1) groups defined by an innate or unchangeable characteristic; 
 
 
 
 (2) groups whose members voluntarily associate for reasons so fundamental to their human dignity that they should not be forced to forsake the association; and 
 
 
 
 (3) groups associated by a former voluntary status, unalterable due to its historical permanence. 
 
 
 
 The first category would embrace individuals fearing persecution on such bases as gender, linguistic background and sexual orientation, while the second would encompass, for example, human rights activists. The third category is included more because of historical intentions, although it is also relevant to anti-discrimination influences, in that one's past is an immutable part of the person." 
 
 
 
 [41] 
  The applicants submit that the children belong to the first category, i.e. groups defined by an innate or unchangeable characteristic. 
 
 
 
 [42] 
  On the one hand, the respondent submits that this is an overly broad group that lacks specificity. On the other hand, according to the Larousse dictionary, the word "immuable," or "unchangeable," means: 
 
 
 
 (Translation) 
 
 
 
 " 
 Unchangable 
  (adjective) 
 
 
 
 i. That which, by its nature, is not subject to change and remains the same: unchangeable truths. 
 
 
 
 ii. That which remains unchanged, does not undergo changes or does not appear to change during a relatively long time: an unchangeable blue sky. 
 
 
 
 iii. That which does not vary in its opinions, feelings, wishes: to be unchangeable in these convictions." 
 
 
 
 [43] 
  With all due respect, the age of a person is certainly not unchangeable. 
 
 
 
 [44] 
  Thus, the applicant's children do not form part of a particular social group. 
 
 
 
 [45] 
  Neither do the children form part of "a group apart" that could be specifically targeted within the meaning of section 97 of the  
 IRPA 
 . The documentary evidence cited by the applicants does not support this allegation, but rather mentions that some evidence can be used to describe the members of the diaspora and make them more identifiable, but do not personalize the risk for the children. The Court recently analyzed this document as a whole: 
 
 
 
 "[27] The applicant submits that the panel's analysis was deficient in his case because it erred in relying on  
 Cius 
  only, without considering the new evidence demonstrating that members of the Haitian diaspora are indeed exposed to a heightened risk of crime. The applicant cites the National Documentation Package on Haiti, which was available to the panel that dealt with his case, and in particular document 14.1, which bears the long title of 'HTI102610.FE 15 October 2007. Haiti: Whether Haitians who have lived abroad (in the United States or Canada, for example) for a long time (several years) are at risk if they return to their homeland; the kinds of risks they might face; whether their return could represent a threat to members of their families and, if so, what kind of threat their families would face and from whom.' 
 
 
 
 "[28] Behind this long title is a brief document that does not support the applicant's claims. Reproduced below is almost the entire content of the document in question, which requires no further comment [emphasis added]: 
 
 
 
 'The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Ottawa responded by letter to a request for information from the Research Directorate regarding the situation of Haitians who return to their country after living abroad for several years (24 Sept. 2007). The UNHCR representative in Canada stated that he had limited information  
 and that he did not know whether such Haitians face any risks simply because they have lived abroad 
  (UN 24 Sept. 2007). 
 
 
 
 'The UNHCR representative indicated that certain categories of people who have lived abroad may face a higher risk of threats and human rights violations, but he did not list them all (ibid.). For example, criminals deported to Haiti risk facing human rights abuses as a result of prison conditions and may be subjected to other violations, such as arbitrary or long-term detention (ibid.). Stories of Haitians who have lived abroad for a long time and who are kidnapped after returning to their country because they appear to have greater financial means are often reported in the media and by non-governmental organizations (UN 24 Sept. 2007). Also, some people are more likely than others to be targeted upon returning to Haiti because of their involvement in political or other activities (ibid.).  
 The risks that a person faces when returning to Haiti depend on that person's political role or past and [translation] "are not necessarily related to that person's status as a Haitian who has lived abroad 
 " (ibid.). 
 
 
 
 'In correspondence sent to the Research Directorate on 27 September 2007, a legal and human rights expert from the Canadian Cooperation Support Program Unit in Haiti (Unité d'appui au programme de la coopération canadienne à Haïti, UAPC) stated that the Haitian  
 diaspora as a whole cannot be considered a [translation] "risk group" and that each case must be considered individually and within [translation] "its own context 
 ." He also indicated, however, that the characteristics of members of the diaspora [language and different behaviour in public] make them [translation] "a group apart" that [translation] "stands out" more and is [translation] "targeted more by kidnappers" (UAPC 27 Sept. 2007). 
 
 
 
 'This issue is addressed in a  
 Boston Globe 
  article that indicates that people deported to Haiti by the United States have limited ties with the country and do not speak Creole well, which makes it difficult for them to adapt and in particular [translation] "makes deportees more easily identifiable" (11 Mar. 2007). 
 
 
 
 'In correspondence sent to the Research Directorate on 18 September 2007, an analyst from the International Crisis Group (ICG) indicated that he has not studied the issue in detail  
 and that he is not aware of any specific cases of Haitians who have been at risk following their return after living abroad for several years 
 . However, he also stated that he has heard rumours and stories about such cases (ICG 18 Sept. 2004). He indicated that [translation] "Haitians who return to the country, particularly to Port-au-Prince" face certain risks and that [translation] "those risks are probably lower outside urban areas" (ibid.). 
 
 
 
 'Information on whether the return of such people could represent a threat to their families could not be found among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate 
 .' 
 
 
 
 "[29] I can identify no error in the panel's reliance on  
 Prophète 
  and  
 Cius 
  in concluding that the risk of criminality currently faced by the applicant as a member of the Haitian diaspora was a generalized risk. Nothing in above-cited document in the National Documentation Package on Haiti calls this conclusion into question, and, having read this document, I do not see any error made by the panel in this respect." 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Tanis 
 , above). 
 
 
 
 [46] 
  The documentary evidence does not support the conclusion that people who have spent time abroad, whether or not they are minors, are subject to a personalized risk or constitute a group apart. 
 
 
 
 [47] 
  The Board analyzed the evidence and concluded that  
 everyone is a target 
  in Haiti. Analysis of the evidence is the Board's responsibility, and this Court cannot substitute its own opinion at the stage of judicial review: 
 
 
 
 "[9]  
 It is for the panel to assess the evidence as a whole and to weigh it 
 . Where the determination is reasonable, as is the case here, the Court must not reassess the evidence in a judicial review proceeding ( 
 FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED;  
 Malagon v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2008 FC 1068, [2008] F.C.J. No. 1586 (QL), at paragraph 44). (Emphasis added.)" 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Sermot v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 708; [2009] F.C.J. No. 1319; 2009 FC 1105). 
 
 
 
 [48] 
  There is no reviewable error in this conclusion, and the intervention of this Court is not warranted. 
 
 
 
 VII.  
 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 [49] 
  The burden was on the applicants to establish the legitimacy of their refugee claim, which they did not. Nothing in the evidence or testimony established a link between the alleged fear and a Convention ground, or that the applicants would be personally targeted in Haiti. The Board's decision was therefore reasonable. As this Court recently pointed out: 
 
 
 
 "[15] The fact that the principal applicant alleged many times that she does not want to return to Haiti because the country is generally unsafe is insufficient for her to be considered a refugee under section 96 of the  
 Act 
  or a person in need of protection under section 97 of the  
 Act 
 . The assessment of the applicants' fear must be made in concreto, and not from an abstract and general perspective ( 
 Ahmad v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2004 FC 808, 134 A.C.W.S.(3d) 493 at paragraph 22). With regard to the evidence in the record, the applicant has failed to meet her burden of proof to show that she would experience a personalized risk. The panel's conclusion on this point is therefore reasonable." 
 
 
 
 ( 
 Guerilus 
 , above). 
 
 
 
 [50] 
  In view of the above, the application for judicial review of the applicants is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [51] 
   
 THE COURT ORDERS that 
 
 
 
 1. The application for judicial review is dismissed; 
 
 
 
 2. No serious question of general importance is certified. 
 
 
 
 Application dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Sharon McCartney/vnh 
 
 
 

