 [15] 
  In  
 Teskey v. Law Society of British Columbia 
  (1990), 71 D.L.R.(4th) 531 (B.C.S.C.), the Court considered this question and focused on the need to protect the public interest which, it held, is usually accomplished by favouring an interpretation that promotes the objective of the legislation. The Court described its approach as follows (at pages 4-5): 
 
 
 
 "As I read these cases, a statutory or regulatory requirement may be read as directory rather than mandatory if the enactment relates to the performance of a public duty, the failure to perform that duty would cause serious inconvenience to persons who have no control over those who are entrusted with the duty, and this would not promote the main objective of the enactment. Other considerations are whether or not there is a penalty provided for non-performance of the requirement, whether the requirement is in a regulation but not in the enabling statute, and what if any prejudice there is to persons who may be affected by the failure to fulfill the requirement. Each case must be decided on the nature of the particular requirement and the statutory and regulatory setting in which it is found. 
 
 
 
 "In my judgment, Rule 501(1) should not be construed as providing a basis for loss of jurisdiction by the benchers to conduct a review of a discipline committee decision if its requirement is not fulfilled. The dominant purpose of the disciplinary provisions of the  
 Act 
 , including the review process by the benchers under s. 48(1), is, in my opinion, the protection of the public. That purpose would be thwarted, at least in part, by interpreting Rule 501(1) as mandatory rather than directory. Protection to the member is inserted in s. 48(1) by setting a 30-day limit for referral of a discipline committee decision to the benchers. There is no penalty provided for failing to comply with Rule 501(1) that is either explicit or implicit in the Law Society rules or in the  
 Act 
 . It is not  
 [page 537] 
  framed as if it were a time limit such as is the case with the 30 days provided for in s. 48(1) of the  
 Act 
  for referral to the benchers. There is no real prejudice to the member for failure to comply with Rule 501(1). The member could at any time inquire if a referral has been made within the 30-day statutory period. In any event, in my view, the rules of natural justice will be available to prevent a miscarriage of justice. 
 
 
 
 "When I consider all the circumstances, I cannot conclude that Rule 501(1) was meant to be a basis of loss of jurisdiction if it was not complied with. I find it is directory only."