 [46] 
  Meanwhile, the respondent argues the RAD used the proper test by interpreting subsection 110(4) of the Act in light of similar wording in paragraph 113( 
 a 
 ); an interpretation of the latter can assist this Court in interpreting the former. Accordingly, the respondent agrees that the series of factors set forth in  
 Raza 
  apply, and that it was available to the RAD to consider them. I quote the relevant parts of  
 Raza 
  in full: 
 
 
 
 [13] As I read paragraph 113( 
 a 
 ), it is based on the premise that a negative refugee determination by the RPD must be respected by the PRRA officer, unless there is new evidence of facts that might have affected the outcome of the RPD hearing if the evidence had been presented to the RPD. Paragraph 113( 
 a 
 ) asks a number of questions, some expressly and some by necessary implication, about the proposed new evidence. I summarize those questions as follows: 
 
 
 
 1.  
 Credibility 
 : Is the evidence credible, considering its source and the circumstances in which it came into existence? If not, the evidence need not be considered. 
 
 
 
 2.  
 Relevance 
 : Is the evidence relevant to the PRRA application, in the sense that it is capable of proving or disproving a fact that is relevant to the claim for protection? If not, the evidence need not be considered. 
 
 
 
 3.  
 Newness 
 : Is the evidence new in the sense that it is capable of: 
 
 
 
 (a) proving the current state of affairs in the country of removal or an event that occurred or a circumstance that arose after the hearing in the RPD, or 
 
 
 
 (b) proving a fact that was unknown to the refugee claimant at the time of the RPD hearing, or 
 
 
 
 (c) contradicting a finding of fact by the RPD (including a credibility finding)? 
 
 
 
 If not, the evidence need not be considered. 
 
 
 
 4.  
 Materiality 
 : Is the evidence material, in the sense that the refugee claim probably would have succeeded if the evidence had been made available to the RPD? If not, the evidence need not be considered. 
 
 
 
 5.  
 Express statutory conditions 
 : 
 
 
 
 (a) If the evidence is capable of proving only an event that occurred or circumstances that arose prior to the RPD hearing, then has the applicant established either that the evidence was not reasonably available to him or her for presentation at the RPD hearing, or that he or she could not reasonably have been expected in the circumstances to have presented the evidence at the RPD hearing? If not, the evidence need not be considered. 
 
 
 
 (b) If the evidence is capable of proving an event that occurred or circumstances that arose after the RPD hearing, then the evidence must be considered (unless it is rejected because it is not credible, not relevant, not new or not material). 
 
 
 
 [14] The first four questions, relating to credibility, relevance, newness and materiality, are necessarily implied from the purpose of paragraph 113( 
 a 
 ) within the statutory scheme of the IRPA relating to refugee claims and pre removal risk assessments. The remaining questions are asked expressly by paragraph 113( 
 a 
 ). 
 
 
 
 [15] I do not suggest that the questions listed above must be asked in any particular order, or that in every case the PRRA officer must ask each question. What is important is that the PRRA officer must consider all evidence that is presented, unless it is excluded on one of the grounds stated in paragraph [13] above. 
