[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: The applicant, by motion and material filed July 11, 1994, seeks an extension of time to file and serve her record on the grounds that the Legal Service Society of B.C. approval has just been obtained, that the court reporters cannot prepare a transcript of the proceedings before the Convention Refugee Determination Division until the July 12, 1994, at the earliest and that counsel, a sole practitioner, is appearing before the Convention Refugee Determination Division on July 11, 12 and 13 and before an immigration adjudicator for a full day on July 14. The applicant's counsel has indicated that two weeks would be a sufficient extension and therefore the paragraph in the supporting affidavit, indicating that she will be away on holiday during the month of August, is superfluous.
[2]
The applicant has applied for the extension in a timely manner, filing this motion three days before time runs out.
[3]
The respondent opposes the extension on the grounds that:
1. A slow pace of processing applications by Legal Aid cannot be permitted to defeat the policy of the
Immigration Act
as to the expeditious processing of leave applications;
2. The personal schedule of counsel, or the workload counsel has undertaken, is not the type of reason which the jurisprudence indicates justifies granting extensions of time; and
3. A factor to be considered, in deciding whether to grant an extension of time, is the seriousness of the application. While the applicant states in the notice of motion that the applicant has a strong case on the merits, there is no material before the court to demonstrate that the leave application has any merit at all.
[4]
In support of the first point the respondent relies upon
Espinoza v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1992), 142 N.R. 158 (F.C.A.).
[5]
In the
Espinoza
case the applicant's solicitor, who had overlooked the fact that an initial extension was by peremptory order, sought and, after some deserved adverse comment, received an 18 day extension.
[6]
In the present instance this is a first request for an extension. It has been made in a timely fashion.
[7]
Second, counsel for the respondent relies on
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, for the proposition that counsel's workload is not a reason justifying granting an extension of time.
[8]
In the
Chin
case Madame Justice Reed refused to grant an extension on the grounds that scheduling of the commitments of counsel, personal or professional, was not something which justified granting extensions of time. Madame Justice Reed went on to comment:
"On what grounds then do I grant an extension of time. I have already indicated that, in general, I am not receptive to requests which are based solely on the workload counsel has undertaken. When an application for an extension of time comes before me, I look for some reason for the delay which is beyond the control of counsel or the applicant, for example, illness or some other unexpected or unanticipated event." (page 80)
[9]
In the
Chin
case there was no unanticipated cause for delay.
[10]
In the present instance there is at least one other factor, beyond the control of counsel, being the preparation of the transcript by the court reporter.
[11]
Finally, counsel for the respondent submits that a factor to be considered is the absence of material before the court to demonstrate that the leave application has any merit:
Rafique v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(unreported September 17, 1992, decision of Madame Justice Reed: Action No. 92-T-991).
[12]
In the
Rafique
case the extension was sought because a legal aid certificate had not been issued. Madame Justice Reed wrote:
"A factor to be considered, in deciding whether to grant an extension of time, is the seriousness of the application. This of course can only be determined on the basis of what is necessarily an incomplete file. The material in this case however was so sparse that I could not conclude that a serious application existed." (page 2)
The affidavit material is certainly deficient. I would like to think that this was an oversight and that counsel would not take on any case that did not have any merit. Certainly there is no incentive for Vancouver counsel bringing unmeritorious proceedings, for in Vancouver there is minimal time to be bought in that manner.
[13]
Nevertheless, without some further reason, which we have in this case and given the opposition of the respondent, I would not grant an extension without affidavit material dealing reasonably with merit.
[14]
Extensions of time to file and serve, in an immigration matter, often involve a balancing of competing factors including maintaining the summary nature of the proceedings, the potentially great prejudice to the applicant if a reasonable extension is not obtained, that events are sometimes controlled by third parties clearly beyond the control of counsel and an assessment of whether counsel requesting the extension, be they the applicant's or the respondent's counsel, have taken on more work than they can handle. In the latter regard counsel in turn must balance billing targets and a reasonable workload assuming that a minimum of unforeseen things will go wrong with a file. I have observed, for the most part, that counsel accommodate one another for while many extensions of time are requested by counsel who are sole practitioners or work with a small firm, Department of Justice, with many lawyers, from time to time also requests extensions. I would hope this accommodation continues.
[15]
In the present instance, an extension of two weeks, made in a timely manner during the long vacation, neither prejudices anyone nor noticeably delays the proceedings. However as a general caution, counsel, requesting extensions should not push their luck.
Order
[16]
The applicant may have until 8 August, 1994, to serve and file her record.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/gas
[End of document]
