 [17] 
  I fail to see how these factors show that the state can provide effective protection to the applicants: 
 
 
 
 -	First, even when the applicants sought police protection, the only result was a report. No actual protection materialized. The incidents continued; 
 
 
 
 -	Second, state condemnation is not a necessary component of persecution, as stated by the Supreme Court of Canada in  
 Ward 
 . Therefore, Russia's official condemnation of anti-semitism is not pertinent to the issue of the effectiveness of the state's protection. The Board erred in relying on documentary evidence that indicated that the state did not condone anti-semitism and not on evidence that addressed the question of the effectiveness of the state protection; 
 
 
 
 -	Third, it was not necessary for the applicants to approach the police for protection after each incident. In  
 Ward 
  (supra) at pp. 724-725, the court found that it was not necessary for an applicant to attempt to avail himself of state protection unless there was a reasonable possibility that the state would afford him such protection; 
 
 
 
 "Like Hathaway, I prefer to formulate this aspect of the test for fear of persecution as follows:  
 only in situations in which state protection 'might reasonably have been forthcoming', will the claimant's failure to approach the state for protection defeat his claim 
 . Put another way, the claimant will not meet the definition of 'Convention refugee' where it is objectively unreasonable for the claimant not to have sought the protection of his home authorities;  
 otherwise, the claimant need not literally approach the state 
 . 
 
 
 
 "The issue that arises, then, is how, in a practical sense, a claimant makes proof of a state's inability to protect its nationals as well as the reasonable nature of the claimant's refusal actually to seek out this protection. On the facts of this case, proof on this point was unnecessary, as representatives of the state authorities conceded their inability to protect Ward. Where such an admission is not available, however, clear and convincing confirmation of a state's inability to protect must be provided. For example, a claimant might advance testimony of  
 similarly situated individuals let down by the state protection arrangement 
  or the claimant's testimony of  
 past personal incidents in which state protection did not materialize 
 ." (my emphasis)