[7]
On the 19th of April, 1995, the Court of Appeal released its decision in
Merck & Co. et al.
v.
Apotex Inc.
[see footnote 4] Mr. Justice MacGuigan, for the court, wrote at page 375:
"The trial judge stated his views as follows ...:
'That may be an appropriate description of the chemical processes here followed. Nevertheless, I am persuaded, as the plaintiffs submit, that the enalapril maleate delivered to Apotex in these three lots could not be said to be in existence for purposes of the statutory immunity until the product was considered by Delmar to be of such a quality that the manufacturer would ship it under the contract for purchase by Apotex. Only when it was deemed to be of proper quality could it be considered to be purchased or acquired by Apotex within the meaning of s. 56 [of the
Patent Act
]. Since it was not judged by the supplier in these cases to be of that quality until after the issue of the patent to Merck in mid-October, 1990, each of those lots of bulk enalapril maleate could not be said to be in existence at that date.'
"I agree with the trial judge that the three lots of enalapril maleate had not been 'purchased or acquired' by Apotex, within the meaning of s. 56. In my view, purchasers cannot be said to have 'purchased or acquired' a product until they have obtained title to it. Since we were shown no evidence of a contrary intention in the contract between Apotex and Delmar, title could not pass to Apotex until the product was in a deliverable state: see s. 19, rule 5 of the
Sale of Goods Act
, R.S.O. 1990, c. S-1. In circumstances where the seller itself thought that the product was unsuitable for delivery, I do not think this court should conclude otherwise.
"It is true, as Apotex submitted, that enalapril maleate was in existence even before the lots were repurified. Moreover, as I have pointed out, the form taken by an invention is not governing for the purposes of s. 56. Thus, if Apotex had purchased or acquired enalapril maleate in any form, whether pure bulk powder, tablets, or some other combination of enalapril maleate and another substance, it could be said to have acquired Merck's invention within the meaning of s. 56. However, in the case at bar, the product which Apotex sought to purchase or acquire was
pure
powder. If the seller was not satisfied that the product met that description and could be delivered, Apotex could not be said to have acquired the product." [see footnote 5]