[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application by Shahid Aziz (the applicant) for judicial review, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, of a decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission (the Commission), dated October 26, 1992, dismissing the applicant's complaint of discrimination against Telesat Canada (Telesat). In its decision, the Commission considered that the applicant's complaint was unfounded.
[2]
The applicant seeks an order setting aside the decision of the Commission dismissing the applicant's complaint, dated November 15, 1990, against Telesat and directing the Commission carry on further investigation. The applicant also seeks an order directing the Commission to examine and consider the evidence submitted by the applicant relating to satisfactory performance reviews and other evidence related to the applicant's termination of employment.
Grounds For The Application
[3]
Essentially, the grounds for the application are that:
a) the Commission failed to observe a principle of natural justice or procedural fairness in reaching its decision;
b) the Commission erred in law in making its decision;
c) the Commission based its decision on an erroneous finding of fact that it made without regard for the material before it;
d) the Commission, and its investigator, acted, in reaching their decision and report, in a manner that was contrary to law.
Background
[4]
The applicant is of Pakistani origin and holds a Master of Science degree in Physics from the Punjab University, Lahore, Pakistan and a Master of Engineering degree in Electrical Engineering from Concordia University in Montreal.
[5]
From 1970 to 1983, the applicant was employed as an engineer with Northern Telecom, Pratt & Whitney, Canadian Marconi, AES Data Ltd., RCA Ltd. and NTI Inc. The applicant began his employment with Telesat in October 1983 as a senior spacecraft subsystems engineer. The applicant was employed at a rank of TL-2 from 1983 to 1990. As I understand it, there are 13 engineers employed in the applicant's section, Space Programs. These engineers are classified at levels TL-1, TL-2 (the applicant's level) or TL-3. Some of the senior engineers (TL-2 and TL-3) work as supervisors, program managers and bus managers and are responsible for specific areas and programs within the section. All of the engineers report to the Manager, Launch Systems and Spacecraft Bus Engineering, who is responsible for assessing their overall work performance.
[6]
From October 1983 to October 1988, the applicant's performance review at Telesat was "on target", which designates a satisfactory level of performance.
[7]
On October 4, 1988, Robin Gubby (Gubby), a new supervisor became the applicant's line manager (the manager). The applicant's review in November 1988 was "on target", subject to the following comments made by Gubby:
"6. Comments - Manager
Shahid's performance is marginal for TL-2 level. His previous supervisor and two Program Managers have commented that
his level of initiative and diligence in reviewing designs, tests, etc. was unacceptably low
during the year.
I have found Shahid's level of knowledge
in his assigned area of responsibility, and in particular, his general understanding of the principles of the subsystem design and operation
to be inadequate
. He has been advised of this and is aware that significant improvement must occur. A follow-up review will take place in three months. Unfortunately, I have found that his reaction to counselling is very uncooperative and evasive, making it very difficult to assist Shahid in pinpointing the reasons for his
below-target
performance."
[8]
According to the investigation report, the manager stated that in retrospect, he should have stated that the applicant's appraisal was below target instead of on target. According to the manager, the objectives that had been set were vague and therefore he could not rate the applicant as anything other than on-target. In the investigation report, the manager also indicated that he based some of his comments on his past experience with the applicant and on his having supervised the applicant for one month. During that month, he had meetings with engineers, about 12, to determine their level of understanding, and although he found that most of the engineers were lacking in the necessary knowledge, it was not to the same extent as the applicant. All of the applicant's colleagues also received on target ratings.
[9]
On January 10, 1989, the applicant wrote a "confidential" letter to Mr. John S. Korda, Senior Manager (Senior Manager) to whom Gubby reported, expressing his concern regarding Gubby's conduct and indicating that the only explanation that the applicant could find for Gubby's comments and actions were possibly based on a racial bias. The applicant used the word "may" when speaking of the issue of racial bias.
[10]
According to the applicant, Gubby also took steps to allege the applicant's shortcomings as an employee, namely that he refused to travel on business as instructed, that he was incompetent, that his vacation plans conflicted with job assignments and that he cheated on overtime claims.
[11]
A follow up review to the November 1988 appraisal occurred six months later. The applicant was assessed "on target" except for his knowledge. Apparently detailed objectives were drafted for the applicant. The applicant refused to sign this assessment.
[12]
With respect to the applicant's letter to the Senior Manager, the matter was referred to the Manager of Human Resources, who met with both the manager and the applicant. At this meeting, the applicant expressed the concern that he was being discriminated against. The Manager of Human Resources drafted a letter to the applicant, dated February 22, 1989, signed by the Senior Manager, indicating that although there were work-related issues to be resolved between the applicant and the manager, there were no reasonable grounds for the allegation of discrimination.
[13]
The applicant received from Gubby ratings of "below target" in his May of 1989 review and his annual performance rating on November 21, 1989.
[14]
As a result of these ratings, the applicant was placed on probation in January 1990 for six months under a Performance Improvement Program (PIP). According to the applicant, the procedures set out in the Performance Improvement Program were not followed by the applicant's manager. The applicant considered the PIP a sham.
[15]
In addition, it is clear that no matter how the applicant performed during the PIP period, Gubby had decided he could not work with the applicant and this before January 1990.
[16]
Based on the PIP, the applicant's employment was terminated on July 25, 1990, after the applicant refused to sign a letter of resignation and a final release form in exchange for three months' salary and a package with a relocation consultant. Telesat then terminated the applicant's employment alleging failure to meet the standards of performance of his position.
[17]
On July 26, 1990, the applicant filed a complaint with the Commission. The applicant did not sign a formal complaint as he was told that his complaint would be assigned to a human rights officer. The human rights officer informed the applicant that she would attempt to settle the applicant's complaint with Telesat and that he was not to sign a formal complaint until the settlement was concluded.
[18]
On October 10, 1990, a human rights officer informed the applicant that Telesat offered a settlement of eight months' salary with no apology for the alleged discrimination. This was unacceptable to the applicant.
[19]
On November 15, 1990, the applicant filed a complaint with the Commission, alleging that Telesat discriminated against him in the course of his employment by treating him in an adverse differential manner because of his race, national or ethnic origin and family status in violation of s. 7 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6. The applicant outlined his complaint in the following terms:
"I have been an employee of Telesat Canada since 1983 and have had consistently good appraisals.
"On October 4, 1988, Robin Gubby informed my section that he was our new supervisor. Later on the same day, we met because he wanted to discuss a project I was working on. Without any documentation or prior knowledge of this project he informed me that I did not know what I was talking about and that he was going to have me fired. Because of the timing of his arrival, he did our performance appraisals. At a preliminary performance review meeting he told me that he was going to assess me as 'below target' without consulting with the supervisors who had seen my work throughout the 1988 appraisal period.
"In the course of 1989-1990, Robin Gubby accused me of several unsubstantiated errors in judgment or failure to perform my duties. Some examples are that I refused to travel when required, was not conscientious, did not have sufficient knowledge of certain technical issues, had used abusive language with Suzanne Jabour and had charged the organization excessive overtime.
"On one occasion he also told me that if I considered my family more important than my job then I should look for another job. He also told me I didn't know how to run my family affairs.
"When I was out of town on business trips, Robin Gubby would call my hotel room and my colleagues in order to check up on me, for example when I was in Los Angeles and in Florida throughout June and August 1989. I was finally terminated on July 25, 1990.
"Robin Gubby does not treat other employees in this fashion. He had never met me until our first meeting in October 1988 and had no reason to immediately begin criticizing my performance. I therefore believe he is treating me this way because of my race, national or ethnic origin and my family status."
[20]
On November 16, 1990 Lisa Quiring (Quiring) was appointed the investigator in the applicant's complaint. Quiring conducted interviews with the Telesat staff in November and December of 1991 and with the applicant on January 8 and 9, 1992. The applicant indicated that during his interview he provided Quiring with the names of individuals she could contact who would support his position. Quiring completed her report on February 18, 1992. She recommended that the Commission dismiss the applicant's complaint because on the evidence the allegation of discrimination was unfounded. In the findings section of the report, Quiring writes:
"3. The evidence shows that the complainant's employment was terminated because his work performance was unacceptable. Despite the complainant's annual performance appraisals which rated him as on-target, the evidence shows that the complainant experienced performance problems prior to the arrival of the new Manager in 1988.
"4. There is no evidence to support the complainant's allegation that he was treated differently than his colleagues because of his race, national or ethnic origin or family status, or that these were factors in the decision to terminate his employment."
[21]
A more detailed account of Quiring's investigation is found in the Investigation Report. The report outlined the applicant's complaint, the position of the parties and a summary of information obtained from individuals at Telesat as well as the applicant under the following subheadings: accusations of errors in judgment or failure to perform duties; complainant's performance and termination of employment; and race, national or ethnic origin and family status as factors in the complainant's treatment. The report also addressed the applicant's allegations and set out the views of both Telesat and the applicant regarding the events that transpired, complete with allegations and denials.
[22]
The Investigation Report was signed by the Regional Director on February 20, 1992 and by the Acting Director of Compliance on March 20, 1992. The report was disclosed to both parties on March 25, 1992.
[23]
On April 10, 1992, Anne Graham, Manager of Human Resources for Telesat submitted comments on the investigation report on behalf of Telesat.
[24]
On April 22, 1992, the applicant wrote to the Commission requesting information to enable him to make further submissions. On June 29, 1992, the applicant filed an extensive written response, which included a four page letter accompanied by an eighteen page commentary on the investigation report, together with 46 annexes (Aziz affidavit, Ex. 13), essentially replying to Telesat's allegations and defences and providing an analysis of the evidence. The applicant indicated that Quiring failed to interview persons whose names he had provided. The applicant was of the view that the investigator did not conduct a fair and thorough investigation, as she accepted Telesat's evidence at face value and did not test it for consistency and credibility.
[25]
The applicant's complaint was considered by the Commission at its meeting of October 19, 1992. According to the affidavit of Lucie Veillette (Veillette), Secretary to the Commission, the following material was before the Commission:
1) a detailed Investigation Report dated February 18, 1992;
2) a complaint form dated November 15, 1990;
3) submissions by the applicant to Charles Theroux dated June 29, 1992;
4) a list of 46 appendices attached to the applicant's submission;
5) submissions by Anne Graham of Telesat, dated April 10, 1992.
[26]
Although a copy of the 46 appendices were not included in the Agenda book, they were available at the Commission meeting for consultation.
[27]
By letter dated October 26, 1992, the Commission advised the applicant that:
"The Canadian Human Rights Commission has reviewed the investigation report of your complaint (H31995) against Telesat Canada dated November 15, 1990, alleging discrimination in employment on the grounds of race, national or ethnic origin and family status.
The Commission also reviewed your submission dated June 29, 1992
.
"The Commission has decided, pursuant to subparagraph 44(3)(b)(i) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, to dismiss the complaint because on the evidence the allegation of discrimination is unfounded.
"As the Commission's decision is final, we have closed our file on this complaint." (underlining is mine)
[28]
The applicant notes that the Commission, in its meeting of October 19, 1992, met from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., for a total of six hours. According to information obtained by the applicant (Aziz affidavit, Ex. 15), a total of four hours was spent on reviewing 148 cases, for a total of 2099 pages of material. The six out-of-town Commission members had nine days to study and travel before the meeting and the two Ottawa members had ten days to review their books.
[29]
According to the Commission, the part-time Commission members received the material nine days before the meeting which commenced on a Monday. Within a week or two following the meeting, the members submitted documents to the Secretary of the Commission showing that they had spent an average of five days of reading and preparation time.
Applicant's Position
[30]
The applicant has attacked the Commission's decision in two main areas, namely the adequacy of the investigation and the adequacy of the Commissioners' consideration of his complaint.
[31]
Essentially, the applicant's position is that although the investigator and the Commission agreed with Telesat that the applicant was incompetent and was terminated "because his work performance was unacceptable", the record contains clear evidence to show that the applicant's termination of employment was not because of unacceptable work performance and that the Commission failed to consider this evidence. In support of this position, the applicant submits that the investigator failed to consider relevant and crucial evidence supporting the applicant's complaint. As such, the Commission erred in relying on the investigation report and the materials before it in making its decision, dated October 26, 1992. Therefore, argues the applicant, by relying on the investigation report, the Commission breached the principles of natural justice or procedural fairness, erred in law in making its decision on erroneous findings of fact and acted contrary to law.
[32]
The applicant notes that from 1983 to 1988 he received salary increments for his level, TL-2 and received on target performance appraisals. The applicant also notes that before Gubby became his supervisor in October 1988, he was never accused of incompetence, cheating on overtime and refusing to travel. The following is a summary of results and comments of the applicant's performance review for 1988. Prior to October 1988, D. Wang (Wang) had been the applicant's supervisor. Although the October 4th to November 1988 review was signed by Gubby, Wang made the following comments:
"ANIK E program is the very first spacecraft program that he has been requested to participate in the design reviews. Due to the changes in his responsibilities and his commitment to provide support to SES consulting program, his performance for his new responsibilities is less than expectation.
"Mr. Aziz should be encouraged to become more as a senior design engineer to assess the design philosophy and the design adequacy of the spacecraft with respect its contractual requirements other than as a test engineer to review testing only. As well as continuing to provide engineering support, he should be encouraged to get more involved on engineering problems as being developed and identify solutions to the problem."
[33]
As noted earlier, Gubby made the following comments on the applicant's review:
"6. Comments - Manager
Shahid's performance is
marginal
for TL-2 level. His previous supervisor and two Program Managers have commented that
his level of initiative and diligence in reviewing designs, tests, etc. was unacceptably low
during the year.
I have found Shahid's level of knowledge
in his assigned area of responsibility, and in particular, his general understanding of the principles of the subsystem design and operation
to be inadequate
. He has been advised of this and is aware that significant improvement must occur. A follow-up review will take place in three months. Unfortunately, I have found that his reaction to counselling is very uncooperative and evasive, making it very difficult to assist Shahid in pinpointing the reasons for his
below-target
performance."
[34]
The applicant submits that for the investigator and the Commission to accept Telesat's allegation of incompetence, it has to explain why an employee who had been competent for five years suddenly became incompetent so soon after Gubby became supervisor. The applicant maintains that in this case, the investigator and the Commission accepted a mere allegation of incompetence as evidence of incompetence.
[35]
The applicant further submits that the investigator and the Commission erred in not giving significance to the contrary evaluation of the level of competence of the applicant by various Telesat management officers. The applicant notes that he was hired and paid as a TL-2 for five years, however, since 1988 Telesat could not categorically state whether the applicant was of TL-2 calibre, TL-1 or qualified as an engineer. The applicant provides the following example: Gubby wrote in the applicant's performance review in 1988 that the applicant's performance was marginal for TL-2 level while in 1990, in the final report on the results of the PIP, Gubby wrote that the applicant "although able, under close supervision, to perform tasks satisfactorily at about the lower end of the TL-1 level" (paragraph 44 of the Investigation Report). On the other hand, the engineer who supervised the PIP concluded that "the complainant could not meet the requirements of an engineer" (paragraph 41 of the Investigation Report).
[36]
The applicant is also of the view that the PIP was not a program to improve the applicant's performance, but to create evidence for his termination. According to the applicant, the investigation report shows that as early as October 11, 1989, or about four months before the PIP was in place, it was clear that Gubby (the manager) and John Korda (the senior manager) had decided that the applicant "was not what was needed on their team and that they could not work through a Performance Improvement Program" (paragraph 34 of the Investigation Report). The applicant maintains the evidence shows that the manager (Gubby) and the Senior Manager (Korda) wanted the applicant terminated or transferred. Therefore, the PIP was nothing more than a formality, the purpose of which was to provide a reason to terminate the applicant's employment. For that reason, says the applicant, the steps contemplated by the PIP were not followed.
[37]
The applicant further submits that the Commission could not have considered the applicant's case properly in its meeting of October 19, 1992. The four hours that the Commission devoted to discuss 148 cases show, at most, that it would have devoted 1.62 minutes to each case. The applicant maintains that considering the complexity of the evidence and his 18 page submission, a time of less than thirty minutes to devote to the applicant's complaint was clearly inadequate.
Respondent's Position
[38]
The respondent's position is that essentially the Commission did not commit any reviewable error in dismissing the applicant's complaint under s. 44(3)(b)(i) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. Further, the Commission did not err in the manner in which it conducted its investigation.
[39]
The respondent maintains that the Commission is an administrative tribunal, whose decisions are not required to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis. Therefore, according to the applicant, of the four issues identified by the applicant, only the alleged failure to observe a principle of procedural fairness is relevant. Procedural fairness refers to the manner in which a tribunal reaches a decision, not the decision itself.
[40]
The Commission, when dealing with a complaint, has three options, one of which is to designate an investigator to investigate the complaint. This was done in the case at bar. The respondent submits that there are no regulations regarding the manner in which an investigation must be conducted. This court in
Canada (Attorney General) v. Canadian Human Rights Commission et al.
(1991), 43 F.T.R. 47 (T.D.), at p. 59, held that it would be unfair for the Commission to investigate issues that are extraneous to the complaint. According to the respondent, the applicant did not allege in his complaint form that one of the reasons that he was dismissed was because he had complained to Korda (the Senior Manager) to whom Gubby reported, regarding perceived discrimination. As such, the investigator did not investigate this issue.
[41]
The respondent argues that there is no duty on investigators to interview all the potential witnesses named by either party. The respondent notes that given the number of complaints filed with the Commission and its resources, it and by extension its investigators, have a duty to balance thoroughness with relevance in order to conduct fair investigations within a reasonable time frame. The respondent also notes that in the case at bar, the investigation report shows, at paragraphs 50 and 51, that the investigator interviewed the applicant's colleagues, including two who were married with children and of East Indian origin.
[42]
The respondent maintains there is no obligation upon the investigator to pre-disclose to either party the results of the investigation. The Commission, as part of procedural fairness, accepts that there is a duty to inform the parties of the allegations and defences provided by the other party. In this case, the investigation report discusses at paragraphs 12, 18, 28 and 47 the applicant's response to Telesat's defences.
[43]
The respondent submits that a formal opportunity was provided to the applicant to submit comments after the investigation report was disclosed to the parties. The applicant exercised his right and the material he submitted was presented to the Commission.
[44]
The respondent also submits that in making a decision under s. 44(3)(b)(i) to dismiss a complaint, the Commission may make its decision on the basis of the complaint itself, the investigation report and the submission of the parties. The Commission may also consider other basic material if judged necessary in order to make its own decision which it is then required to make. The
Canadian Human Rights Act
does not require that the Commission examine the contents of the investigation file in its entirety.
[45]
The respondent maintains there is no requirement upon the Commission to deliberate for a certain period of time for each complaint. Further, there is no basis for assuming that the Commission members devoted less than 30 minutes to the applicant's complaint. In any event, the respondent notes that the Commission members spent an average of five days reading the material ahead of time. As such, submits the respondent, this shows that the Commissioners were prepared for the meeting and gave consideration to each case.
[46]
Therefore, the respondent submits that the decision in the applicant's case was made in good faith, on the basis of relevant considerations, and not on the basis of improper or irrelevant considerations. The respondent further submits that the procedures followed by the Commission in respect of the applicant's complaint are consistent with the duty to act fairly which governs the administrative decision made by the Commission.
Discussion
[47]
I have reproduced the relevant provisions of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6, as amended (the
Act
), below:
"2. The purpose of this Act is to extend the laws in Canada and to give effect, within the purview of matters coming within the legislative authority of Parliament, to the principle that every individual should have an equal opportunity with other individuals to make for himself or herself the life that he or she is able and wished to have, consistent with his or her duties and obligations as a member of society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so by discriminatory practices based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability or conviction for an offence for which a pardon had been granted.
"3(1) For all purposes of this Act, race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability and conviction for which a pardon has been granted are prohibited grounds of discrimination.
"7. It is discriminatory practice, directly or indirectly,
(a) to refuse to employ or continue to employ any individual, or
(b) in the course of employment, to differentiate adversely in relation to an employee, on a prohibited ground of discrimination.
"10. It is a discriminatory practice for an employer, employee organization or organization of employers
(a) to establish or pursue a policy of practice, or
(b) to enter into an agreement affecting recruitment, referral, hiring, promotion, training, apprenticeship, transfer or any other matter relating to employment or prospective employment,
that deprives or tends to deprive an individual or class of individuals of any employment opportunities on a prohibited ground of discrimination.
"40(1) Subject to subsection (5) and (7), any individual or group of individuals having reasonable grounds for believing that a person is engaged or has engaged in discriminatory practice may file with the Commission a complaint in a form acceptable to the Commission.
"41. Subject to section 40, the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint it appears to the Commission that
(a) the alleged victim of the discriminatory practice to which the complaint related ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available;
(b) the complaint is one that could be more appropriately dealt with, initially or completely, according to a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act;
(c) the complaint is beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission;
(d) the complaint is trivial, frivolous, vexatious or made in bad faith; or
(e) the complaint is based on acts or omissions the last of which occurred more than one year, or such longer period of time as the Commission considers appropriate in the circumstances, before receipt of the complaint.
"43(1) The Commission may designate a person, in this Part referred to an 'investigator', to investigate a complaint.
"(2) An investigator shall investigate a complaint in a manner authorized by regulations made pursuant to subsection (4) ...
"44(1) An investigator shall, as soon as possible after the conclusion of an investigation, submit to the Commission a report of the findings of the investigation.
"(2) If, on the receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission is satisfied
(a) that the complainant ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available, or
(b) that the complaint could more appropriately be dealt with, initially or completely, by means of a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act
it shall refer the complainant to the appropriate authority.
"(3) On receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission
(a) may request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal in accordance with section 49 to inquire into the complaint to which the report relates if the Commission is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted, and
(ii) that the complaint to which the report relates should not be referred pursuant to subsection (2) or dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e); or
(b) shall dismiss the complaint to which the report relates if it is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is not warranted, or
(ii) that the complaint should be dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e).
"(4) After receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission
(a) shall notify in writing the complainant and the person against whom the complaint was made of its actions under subsection (2) and (3); and
(b) may, in such manner as it sees fit, notify any other person whom it considers necessary to notify under subsection (2) or (3)."
[48]
Therefore, under the
Act
, where an individual, having reasonable grounds for believing that a discriminatory practice is or has occurred, files a complaint in acceptable form, the Commission is required to deal with the complaint unless it appears to the Commission that the complaint falls within one of the exceptions set out in s. 41. Where the complaint is not rejected under s. 41, there are three possible ways to deal with the complaint, namely, the Commission may appoint an investigator under s. 43 to investigate the complaint, appoint a conciliator under s. 47 to attempt to settle the complaint or request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal under s. 49 to appoint a Tribunal to inquire into the complaint.
[49]
If the investigation route is chosen, the complaint enters the investigation stage. With respect to the conduct of the investigation, I note the comments of Nadon, J., in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[50]
Therefore, where an investigator is appointed, he/she is charged with investigating the complaint and submitting to the Commission a report of the relevant facts and his/her conclusions. The position of the investigator in relation to the Commission was described in the following terms by Sopinka, J. (writing for the majority), in
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l'Acadie v. Commission canadienne des droits de la personne et al.
, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 879; 100 N.R. 241; 62 D.L.R.(4th) 385, at p. 898:
"The investigator, in conducting the investigation, does so as an extension of the Commission. I do not regard the investigator as someone independent of the Commission who will then present evidence as a witness before the Commission. Rather, the investigator prepares a report for the Commission. This is merely an example of the principle that applies to administrative tribunals, that they do not have to do all the work themselves but may delegate some of it to others. Although s. 36 [currently section 44] does not require that a copy of the report be submitted to the parties, that was done in this case."
[51]
Upon receipt of the investigation report, the Commission may: refer the complaint to a more appropriate authority (s. 44(2)); request the appointment of a tribunal if it is satisfied that, having regard to all of the circumstances, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted (s. 44(3)) or dismiss the complaint.
[52]
Sopinka, J., indicated at p. 899 of
S.E.P.Q.A.
that it was the intention of s. 36(3)(b), currently s. 44(3)(b)(i), that this occur where there is insufficient evidence to warrant appointment of a tribunal under s. 39, currently s. 49. He continued to describe the process as follows:
"... It is not intended that this be a determination where the evidence is weighed as in a judicial proceeding but rather the Commission must determine whether there is a reasonable basis in the evidence for proceeding to the next stage. It was not intended that there be a formal hearing from the investigatory stage to the judicial or quasi-judicial stage if the test prescribed in s. 36(3)(a) [currently subsection 44(3)] is met. Accordingly, I conclude from the foregoing that, in view of the nature of the Commission's function and giving effect to the statutory provisions referred to, it was not intended that the Commission comply with the formal rules of natural justice. In accordance with the principles of procedural fairness in
Nicholson
, supra, however, I would supplement the statutory provisions by requiring the Commission to comply with the rules of procedural fairness. In this regard, I adopt the statement of Lord Denning, M.R., in
Selvarajan v. Race Relations Board
, [1976] 1 All E.R. 12 (C.A.) quoted thereunder. ..."
[53]
Further, in terms of the nature or the classification of the Commission's decision, as noted by Sopinka, J., in
S.E.P.Q.A.
, the distinction between tribunals exercising their functions in an "administrative" manner as opposed to a "judicial" or "quasi-judicial" manner, in order to determine whether the rules of natural justice apply is no longer critical or determinative. "Rather, a general duty of 'procedural fairness' is to be applied to all administrative decision making processes, the content of which varies according to the circumstances of the particular instance", (
Slattery
, p. 595). Therefore, the decision as to how to deal with the complaint is an administrative procedure in which it is determined whether there is a reasonable basis on the evidence for proceeding to the next stage. As such, the Commission need not comply with the formal rules of natural justice but must act in accordance with procedural fairness.
[54]
Sopinka, J., at p. 902 of
S.E.P.Q.A.
agreed with Marceau, J.A., of the Court of Appeal, that the Commission had a duty to inform the parties of the substance of the evidence obtained by the investigator and which was put before the Commission. The Commission was also required to give the parties the opportunity to respond to this evidence and make all relevant representations in relation thereto. In the case before me, there is no allegation that the applicant was not given the opportunity to respond to the evidence and make representations. In fact, the applicant did respond and made detailed representations.
[55]
When coming to its decision under s. 44(3), the Commission is entitled to consider the investigator's report, such other underlying material as it, in its discretion, considers necessary and the representations of the parties. The Commission is then obliged to make its own decision based on this information, (
S.E.P.Q.A.
at p. 902).
[56]
As noted above, the applicant was provided with a copy of the investigator's report and was given the opportunity to make written submissions. As such, the Commission acted in conformity of the requirements set out in the jurisprudence. However, as noted by Nadon, J., in
Slattery
at p. 598: "... underlying these requirements is the assumption that another aspect of procedural fairness - that the CHRC had an adequate and fair basis on which to evaluate whether there was sufficient evidence to warrant appointment of a tribunal - existed". In my view, Nadon, J., dealt most effectively with the basis upon which the court should evaluate the Commission's decision at pp. 598 to 601, portions of his comments are reproduced below:
"In order for a fair basis to exist for the CHRC to evaluate whether a tribunal should be appointed pursuant to subparagraph 44(3)(a) of the
Act
, I believe that the investigation conducted prior to this decision must satisfy at least two conditions: neutrality and thoroughness.
"With regard to neutrality, it has been held that if the CHRC simply adopts an investigator's conclusions without giving reason, and those conclusions were made in a manner which may be characterized as biased, a reviewable error occurs.
. . . . .
"According to Noel, J. [in
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation v. Canadian Human Rights Commission et al.
, T-1578-91, decision rendered December 15, 1993, Noel, J.] the participation of the Regional Director and the investigator, who had predetermined the issue and invited the complainant to go forth on that basis, in the 'Prior to Investigation Report', was such as to give rise to bias. Although Noel, J., acknowledged that
S.E.P.Q.A
. permitted the CHRC to render a decision without reasons, by adopting the conclusions in the investigator's report, Noel, J., refined this analysis to the extent that, 'If the report which [the CHRC] adopted in making its decision is flawed, it must follow that the decision itself is equally flawed'.
"The requirement of thoroughness of investigation stems from the essential role that investigators play in determining the merits of particular complaints. This essential role was recognized by the Supreme Court in
S.E.P.Q.A.
case. In the words of Sopinka, J.:
'In general, complainants look to the Commission to lead evidence before a tribunal appointed under [section 49], and therefore investigation of the complaint is essential if the [CHRC] is to carry out this role.' (
S.E.P.Q.A.
at 898)
. . . . .
"In determining the degree of thoroughness of investigation required to be in accordance with the rules of procedural fairness, one must be mindful of the interests that are being balanced: the complainant's and respondent's interests in procedural fairness and the CHRC's interests in maintaining a workable and administratively effective system ...
"Deference must be given to administrative decision-makers to assess the probative value of evidence and to decide to further investigate or not to further investigate accordingly. It should only be where unreasonable omissions are made, for example where an investigator failed to investigate obviously crucial evidence, that judicial review is warranted. Such an approach is consistent with the deference allotted to fact-finding activities of the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal by the Supreme Court in the case of
Canada (Attorney General) v. Mossop
, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 554.
"In contexts where parties have the legal right to make submissions in response to an investigator's report, such as in the case at bar, parties may be able to compensate for more minor omissions by bringing such omissions to the attention of the decision maker. Therefore, it should be only where complainants are unable to rectify such omissions that judicial review would be warranted. Although this is by no means an exhaustive list, it would seem to me that circumstances where further submissions cannot compensate for an investigator's omissions would include: (1) where the omission is of such fundamental nature that merely drawing the decision maker's attention to the omission cannot compensate for it or (2) where fundamental evidence is inaccessible to the decision maker by virtue of the protected nature of the information or where the decision maker explicitly disregards it."
[57]
In terms of neutrality, there is jurisprudence which supports the view that if the Commission simply adopts an investigator's conclusion without giving reasons, and those conclusions were made in a biased manner, a reviewable error occurs (see
Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. Canadian Human Rights Commission et al.
(1993), 71 F.T.R. 214 (T.D.)). From my review, I am satisfied that there appears to be no evidence that the Commission simply adopted the investigator's conclusions.
[58]
I am also satisfied that sufficient thoroughness exists, that is, I am satisfied that the Investigation Report dealt with
all of the fundamental issues in the applicant's complaint
, including any and all important documents. Also, if there were omissions in the Report, the omissions were corrected by the applicant's submissions in response to the investigator's report. In the case at bar, the applicant submitted extremely detailed responses together with 46 annexes. Further, I am satisfied that the omission, because not every document was mentioned by the investigator is not significant or fundamental to the outcome of the case. A judicial review would be warranted if the omission were of a fundamental nature. I am satisfied no omission of a fundamental nature occurred.
[59]
Joyal, J., made the following comments, which I adopt, with regards to determining the degree of thoroughness at p. 10 of
Robinson v. Canadian Human Rights Commission et al.
(1995), 90 F.T.R. 33 (T.D.):
"In determining the degree of thoroughness of investigation required to be in accordance with the rules of procedural fairness, the interests of the complainant and the respondent must be balanced with the Commission's interest in maintaining an administratively workable system. Deference must be given to administrative decision-makers to assess the probative value and to decide whether to further investigate accordingly. Only where unreasonable omissions have been made, such as the failure to investigate crucial evidence, is judicial review warranted. In instances where parties have the legal right to make submissions in response to an investigator's report, parties may be able to compensate for minor omissions by bringing them to the attention of the decision-maker. Therefore, only where complainants are unable to rectify such omissions should judicial review be considered."
[60]
However, in coming to a decision, I must also keep in mind Nadon, J.'s, comments at p. 605 of
Slattery
, who set up a fairly high threshold for judicial review of Commission decisions where thoroughness is an issue:
"The fact that the investigator did not interview each and every witness that the Applicant would have liked her to and the fact that the conclusion reached by the investigator did not address each and every alleged incident of discrimination are not in and of themselves fatal as well. This is particularly the case where the Applicant has the opportunity to fill in gaps left by the investigator in subsequent submissions of her own. In the absence of guiding regulations, the investigators, much like the CHRC, must be master of its own procedure, and judicial review of an allegedly deficient investigation should only be warranted where the investigation is clearly deficient."
[61]
From a review of the Investigator's report, it appears that each of the applicant's concerns were addressed and that both the views of the applicant and Telesat were represented. I also note there is a separate section of the report dealing with race, national or ethnic origin and family status, as factors in the complainant's treatment which provides as follows:
"49. The Manager, Human Resources states that 11 other employees were placed on P.I.P. during the 1989 review period. Of these others, she states that all were caucasian and worked in a different area than the complainant and under a different manager. Three of these other employees had their employment terminated.
"50. None of the colleagues who are either married with children and/or visible minority members state that they have been discriminated against by the Manager or the respondent. They indicate that the Manager was not easy to work for. However, in general, they agree with the Manager, that the complainant would not accept negative feedback, was not as diligent as others, and appeared to lack technical knowledge.
"51. Two of the colleagues who deny that they have been discriminated against by the Manager or the respondent, are particularly similar to the complainant in that they are not only married with children, but are of East Indian origin."
[62]
In terms of judicial review of decisions of the Commission, the jurisprudence is clear that courts should not interfere with the exercise of a discretion by an administrative tribunal, merely because the court might have exercised the discretion in a different manner. However, the courts may review the exercise of discretionary power where such power has been exercised in a discriminatory, unfair, capricious or unreasonable manner. In this regard, I note particularly the comments of Jerome, A.C.J., in
Lukian v. Canadian National Railway Co.
(1994), 80 F.T.R. 38 (T.D.), at p. 40:
"Generally, when Courts are called upon to review the exercise of an administrative tribunal's discretionary power, they will be reluctant to interfere since tribunals, by virtue of their training, experience, knowledge and expertise, are better suited than the judiciary to exercise those powers. Provided the Commission's decision is within the discretion given to it, the Court will not interfere with the manner in which it is exercised, unless it can be shown the discretion was exercised contrary to law. What the law requires is the Commission consider each individual case before it , to act in good faith, to have regard to all relevant considerations and not be swayed by irrelevant ones, and to refrain from acting for a purpose contrary to the spirit of its enabling legislation or in an arbitrary or capricious manner. "
[63]
I agree with the respondent's submission that there is no requirement upon the Commission to deliberate for a certain period of time for each complaint. What has to be determined is whether, when the Commission made its decision that the applicant's complaint was unfounded, it did so in good faith and on the basis of relevant considerations, and not on the basis of improper or irrelevant considerations.
[64]
In my view, based on the information before me, there appears to be no basis upon which I should interfere with the Commission's decisions.
[65]
The application for judicial review is denied.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm
[End of document]
