[7]
It was common ground that the essential tests for confusion in this respect are found in s. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10. Looking first at the circumstances specifically mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (e) of that subsection, with respect to the criterion of "inherent distinctiveness" set out in paragraph (a) I would agree with the contention of the appellant and the finding of the Chairman that the respondent's marks have very limited inherent distinctiveness. The word "NUTRI" suggests something nutritious and combined with the words "BRAN" or "MAX" is not very inventive as a name for a food product. With respect to paragraph (b), which requires me to consider "the length of time the trademarks ... have been in use", there was ample evidence before the Chairman and before me as to the use of the respondent's trademark NUTRI-MAX at the relevant time. This evidence demonstrated such use during the five years preceding November, 1982. Whether one takes the relevant date for testing use to be the date of the applicant's applications, that is May 19, 1981, or the date of the oppositions which, as amended, were filed on or about December 17, 1981, there is ample evidence of use by the respondent of this trademark. There was no evidence of use by the applicant of its trademarks at either of those dates. With respect to paragraph (c), "the nature of the wares ...", the Chairman found, and I agree, that there is a similarity between the products of the parties. The respondent's trademarks were registered in respect of "health foods" and a long list of such foods was included by way of definition of this term. The applicant seeks to register its proposed trademarks in respect of "breakfast food and snack food" derived from cereals and vegetables. There is clearly a large potential area of overlap and the appellant has failed to demonstrate the contrary. It was certainly open to the Chairman to find, as he did, and I agree, that with respect to paragraph (d) the nature of the trade in the appellant's products and the respondent's products could be similar. Again, the appellant while in argument suggested the possibility that its products might be sold in grocery stores whereas the respondent's would be sold in health food stores, or that their respective products might be sold in different sections of the same supermarkets, no evidence on this point was brought to my attention and I am prepared to conclude, as did the Chairman, that the fact that the kinds of products covered by the respective trademarks overlap would most probably lead to them being sold in similar channels of trade to some extent. With respect to paragraph (e), "the degree of resemblance between the trademarks ... in appearance or sound", I find that there is at least some resemblance. The use of the word "NUTRI" in all of them provides a resemblance in sight and sound and the ideas which they convey are similar when used in connection with the kinds of food contemplated.