 [46] 
  In the decision at issue in this case, the adjudicator reviewed the procedural history of the various exchanges of correspondence between Passport Canada and the applicants, summarized the positions advanced by Passport Canada and the applicants and conducted a detailed analysis in support of his conclusion upholding Passport Canada's position to the effect that it was more likely than not that the applicants allowed another person to use their passports and that the applicants had provided false information in respect of their applications to obtain replacement passports. More specifically, the adjudicator relied on the following facts: 
 
 
 
 1. The applicants did not report the passports as missing to Passport Canada until March 12, 2010. In the statutory declaration they signed on January 24, 2010, in support of the request to obtain replacement passports, the applicants stated that the passports had been stolen from their car in Edmonton on January 15, 2010, and that they had last seen the passports at approximately 1:30 PM that day; 
 
 
 
 2. On March 11, 2010, however, the applicants provided a contradictory statement to Passport Canada, following Passport Canada's disclosure to them of the fact that the passports were seized in Dubai on January 15, 2010. Obviously, they could not have been stolen from Edmonton on the same day. Accordingly, the applicants changed their version of events and stated that the last time they remembered seeing their passports was the date they were delivered to them, in late December 2009; 
 
 
 
 3. Mr. Slaeman and Ms. Roukan provided contradictory versions of events regarding who put the passports away in a black document bag that they claimed was later transferred to their car, without them noticing that the passports were missing from it; 
 
 
 
 4. In subsequent statements, "answering pointed questions from the Bureau" (adjudicator's decision, page 6), the applicants provided new dates regarding when they last saw the passports, stating first that they had been put in the glove compartment of their car in "early January" and, thereafter, Mr. Slaeman modified his version of events again and stated that he "believed" he put the passports in the car in the first week of January; 
 
 
 
 5. The passports contained a Syrian visa, which was issued in Ottawa on January 4, 2010. The adjudicator noted that this fact was completely inconsistent with the applicants' version of events: and 
 
 
 
 6. The applicants provided absolutely no explanation as to who could possibly have stolen the passports from their home in the few days between their receipt and the date they would have needed to have been sent to Ottawa to allow for the issuance of the Syrian visas on January 4th.