[29]
In de Cordova and others v. Vick Chemical Coy, 68 R.P.C. 103 at page 105, Lord Radcliffe states:
"In 1911, a Mr. Richardson, an American druggist, coined the word 'Vaporub' to form the trade appellation of one of these medicated ointments which he had then been manufacturing for some years. Thus the ointment was not a new substance, but the name that he gave to it was a new name. In 1915 the word 'Vaporub' was registered as a trademark in the United States of America, and it has since been registered (denoted by the symbols 'VapoRub' or 'Vaporub') in fifty different countries, of which twenty are English speaking countries and include England, Canada and New Zealand.
"The respondents registered trademark 1852 in Jamaica in the year 1924. It consists of the words 'Vicks VapoRub Salve', a device consisting of a triangle with the words 'Vicks Chemical Company' printed on the sides, and other subsidiary words below the triangle. In the year 1941 the respondents registered in Jamaica trademark 3707, which consists of the single word 'VapoRub'.
. . . . .
"
They have not used the mark itself on the goods that they have sold, but a mark is infringed by another trade if, even without using the whole of it upon or in connection with his goods, he uses one or more of its essential features.
The identification of an essential feature depends partly on the court's own judgment and partly on the burden of the evidence that is placed before it. A trademark is undoubtedly a visual device; but it is well-established law that the ascertainment of an essential feature is not to be by ocular test alone. Since words can form part, or indeed the whole, of a mark, it is impossible to exclude consideration of the sound or significance of those words. Thus it has long been accepted that, if a word forming part of a mark has come in trade to be used to identify the goods of the owner of the mark, it is an infringement of the mark itself to use that word as the mark or
part of the mark
of another trader, for confusion is likely to result. It is sufficient to refer to the words of Lord Cranworth, L.C., in
Seixo v. Provezende
(1866), L.R. 1 Ch. 192, at p. 197: 'If the goods of a manufacturer have, from the mark or device he has used, become known in the market by a particular name, I think that the adoption by a rival trader of any mark which will cause his goods to bear the same name in the market, may be as much a violation of the rights of that rival as the actual copy of his device'. Decisions to the same effect are to be found in
Ford v. Foster
(1872), L.R. 7 Ch. 611,
Orr Ewing & Coy. v. Johnston & Coy
(1880), 13 Ch. D. 434,
Saville Perfumery Ld. v. June Perfect, Ltd.
(1941), 58 R.P.C. 147. The likelihood of confusion or deception in such cases is not disproved by placing the two marks side by side and demonstrating how small is the chance of error in any customer who places his order for goods with both the marks clearly before him, for orders are not placed, or are often not placed, under such conditions.
It is more useful to observe that in most persons the eye is not an accurate recorder of visual detail, and that marks are remembered rather by general impressions or by some significant detail than by any photographic recollection of the whole.
" (Emphasis added)