[30]
The defendant made the point that in the year 1984 the marketing of a class of beverage known as "coolers" commenced in Canada, and the defendant's wine coolers were marketed in Canada in association with the defendant's trademark SPLITZ. The defendant has not sold coolers other than wine coolers. The defendant maintains the trademark SPLITZ indicates to the buying public a product from one source and therefore is not confusing within the meaning of the Trade Marks Act. I cannot accept that premise because the real emphasis is on the word "wildberry". Mr. J. Prouse, Justice of the Court of Queen's Bench of Alberta, in Mark's Work Wear House Ltd. et al. v. The Governor and Company of Adventurers of England Trading et al., unreported case no. 8001-10937, states at p. 4:
"The cases also state that in determining whether there is a likelihood of confusion between the alleged similar names, it is important to have regard to the first impression which is created on the persons in the target group. The fact that it is common to have imperfect recollection and also the effect of careless pronunciation of the words, I think it is extremely important that we compare the names here, namely 'Work Wearhouse' and 'Workwear Place'. Why was the name 'Workwear Place' adopted? The evidence of employees of the defendant working in Calgary was to the effect they did not select the name and although they thought there was a similarity with the name of plaintiff's store, they did not mention it to superiors as the direction in that regard came from Toronto.
The defendant's employees also thought the fact that the defendant's name appeared in the advertising material, this would over-come any confusion.
I am of the opinion that the entire packet, being the format of the promotional advertising, the use of the name, the T.V. advertising and most certainly the first impression which was created on persons, there was a real likelihood of confusion in the minds of the particular customers." (emphasis added)
Thus the use of only part of a registered trademark or the use of Splitz does not suffice to relieve the defendant of the confusion caused through use of WILDBERRY on its labels.