[5]
Counsel insisted that it was the element of "friendship" (based upon that single quote from my book) that would raise a reasonable apprehension of bias. He also claimed that, my Cabinet experience may affect my consideration of a certificate from the Privy Council's office opposing disclosure. He referred to several decisions relating to bias, the most recent one being a decision of the House of Lords in
Re Pinochet
[see footnote 2]. Therein Lord Browne-Wilkinson said as follows:
"2.
Apparent bias
"As I have said, Senator Pinochet does not allege that Lord Hoffmann was in fact biased. The contention is that there was a real danger or reasonable apprehension or suspicion that Lord Hoffmann might have been biased, that is to say, it is alleged that there is an appearance of bias not actual bias.
"The fundamental principle is that a man may not be a judge in his own cause. This principle, as developed by the courts, has two very similar but not identical implications. First it may be applied literally: if a judge is in fact a party to the litigation or has a financial or proprietary interest in its outcome then he is indeed sitting as a judge in his own cause. In that case, the mere fact that he is a party to the action or has a financial or proprietary interest in its outcome is sufficient to cause his automatic disqualification. The second application of the principle is where a judge is not a party to the suit and does not have a financial interest in its outcome, but in some other way his conduct or behaviour may give rise to a suspicion that he is not impartial, for example because of his friendship with a party. This second type of case is not strictly speaking an application of the principle that a man must not be judge in his own cause, since the judge will not normally be himself benefiting, but providing a benefit for another by failing to be impartial.
"In my judgment, this case falls within the first category of case, viz where the judge is disqualified because he is a judge in his own cause. In such a case, once it is shown that the judge is himself a party to the cause, or has a relevant interest in its subject matter, he is disqualified without any investigation into whether there was a likelihood or suspicion of bias. The mere fact of his interest is sufficient to disqualify him unless he has made sufficient disclosure: see Shetreet,
Judges on Trial
, (1976), p. 303;
De Smith, Woolf & Towel, Judicial Review of Administrative Action
, 5th Ed. (1995), p. 525. I will call this 'automatic disqualification.'"
My understanding of these reasons is that Lord Hoffmann belonged to the first category and was disqualified for being a judge in his own cause. I presume the applicants would have me in the second category because my "conduct or behaviour may give rise to a suspicion that [I am] not impartial" because of my friendship with one of the respondents. That "second type of case is not strictly speaking an application of the principle that a man must not be judge in his own cause". In the present instance, my friendship with Mr. Chrétien was as between Cabinet colleagues more than twenty-five years ago.