[11]
After analyzing the jurisprudence regarding just cause for dismissal of an employee, in particular, the case of
Scott (Wm.) & Co. v. Canadian Food and Allied Workers Union, Local P-162
, [1977] 1 Can. L.R.B.R. 1, and based upon his assessment of the extensive evidence before him, the Adjudicator concluded that the dismissal of Captain Kmet was too severe a penalty under the circumstances. In coming to that conclusion, the Adjudicator relied on the following factors:
1. that the application of the Company rule transpired under difficult and confusing circumstances and thus, while not excusing their breach, nevertheless affected the degree of intentionality and thus, the extent of culpability on Captain Kmet's behalf. At page 63 of his decision, the Adjudicator states as follows:
"I have concluded that there was no attempt by Captain Kmet to knowingly act in defiance of the rule against drinking. There was no premeditated deliberate act on the part of Captain Kmet and the rest of the flight crew to enter the lounge for the purposes of drinking."
2. that Captain Kmet had a significant degree of service with the employer, during which time he proved to be an able pilot, and that during this time he enjoyed a relatively discipline-free employment history;
3. that Captain Kmet had been singled out by the employer for arbitrary and harsh treatment relative to that received by his First Officer, who had been consuming alcohol with the respondent in susbtantially identical circumstances, and that the employer's disciplinary response arose, not out of a concern for safety, but out of the concern that Captain Kmet had refused the request of the charter operator, Derek Rendle, for a 6:00 a.m. departure time. In reaching this conclusion, the Adjudicator relied on the following evidence before him:
(a) at 9:00 p.m. on June 18, 1995, Captain Kmet refused to accede to Mr. Rendle's request for a departure time of 6:00 the following morning. The request had been consented to by various officials of the applicant, and had been agreed to by First Officer Scanlon, subject to Captain Kmet's approval. Under the circumstances prevailing at the times, such a departure would have been in clear violation of the air safety regulation requiring eight hours of prone rest prior to a flight crew's report to duty;
(b) Mr. Rendle immediately thereafter wrote in complaint to the owner of Kelowna. He was highly critical of Captain Kmet's customer service attitude, which he characterized as one that "does not appear to go the extra mile for his passengers". By contrast, he praised the attitude of First Officer Scanlon, and to the extent that he was critical of him, he attributed it to the influence of Captain Kmet. Mr. Rendle also stated that, as a result of the logistical, and what he characterized as attitudinal problems, he had encountered that evening, he would be taking his ongoing business elsewhere;
(c) within a week of the incident, the owner of Kelowna advised Mr. Rendle that certain operational changes had been made to ensure that the incident would not happen again. In this context he stated that action had been taken against the flight crew;
(d) the employer did not take any substantial steps to verify the accuracy of numerous reports regarding the incident of June 18, 1995, notwithstanding a number of discrepancies in the various accounts;
(e) First Officer Scanlon was suspended for two weeks for his breach of the rule against drinking while Captain Kmet was dismissed summarily.