[4]
No evidence was led to rebut any of this testimony notwithstanding that the respondent was in the courtroom throughout the hearing before me. In the
Law of Evidence in Civil Cases
, Sopinka and Lederman, (Toronto, Butterworths, 1974), at page 535, the following passage appears:
"... the failure of a party or a witness to give evidence which it was in the power of the party or witness to give and by which the facts might have been elucidated, justifies the court in drawing the inference that the evidence of the party or the witness would have been unfavourable to the party to whom the failure was attributed."
At page 537, by reference to the foregoing passage, the text continues:
"The rule is not restricted in its application to the plaintiff or other party who has the ultimate burden of proof. Failure on the part of a defendant to testify or to call a witness, once a prima facie case has been made out against the defendant, may be the subject of an adverse inference."
In
Wigmore on Evidence
, vol. II (Chadbourn rev. 1979) at s. 285, the learned author indicates that an adverse inference should not be drawn where a reasonable explanation is provided. Here, counsel for the respondent indicated that she would not call the respondent because, in her submission, the applicant simply had failed to meet the onus on her and therefore evidence of the respondent or on his behalf was not required. It was certainly open to counsel for the respondent to adopt this position. However, in doing so, I am satisfied that she assumed a risk that if I concluded otherwise, an adverse inference might be drawn against the respondent. I am satisfied that the explanation provided does not preclude me from drawing an adverse inference. Further, at s. 288 in
Wigmore
, it is provided that an adverse inference is not justified where the witness, here the respondent, is equally available to both parties. I am satisfied that such was not the case in this matter. Although the respondent was in the courtroom throughout the hearing, by the time it became apparent to counsel for the applicant that the respondent would not be called by his counsel, the applicant had closed her case. In such circumstances, I am satisfied that it cannot be said that the witness, that is to say the respondent, was equally available to both parties even though he was in the courtroom.