[23]
These presumptions, however, are at best guidelines when no evidence is available to show that a mark has received wide acceptance. It is quite clear from the affidavit of Peter Greenhough that WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler has "achieved wide acceptance in the eyes of the public".
"9. WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler is sold in standard cases of 24 bottles, each case containing six four-bottle packs. Each bottle of cooler contains 341 millilitres, giving a total of 8184 ml per case. For administrative ease, Seagram frequently expresses sales figures in terms of 9,000 ml. (9 litre) cases. Statistics compiled from Seagram's business records indicate that for the 13 months from January, 1986 to February, 1987, over 200,000 cases (or 4,800,000 bottles) of WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler have been shipped from our plants to provincial liquor boards. These shipments reflect an In Bond Sales Value of over $2.8 million. These records also indicate that about 170,000 cases (or 4,080,000 bottles) of WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler have been sold to the public across Canada during this period. These sales reflect an estimated retail sales value of over $6 million.
"10. The records of Seagram indicate that the amount of WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler sold, broken down according to province and territory, together with their estimated retail sales value, is as follows. These records include data which originated from sales figures compiled by the Association of Canadian Distillers as set out in paragraph 11 herein.
"12. The said Cooler Tracking Report documents the retail sales across Canada and in each of the provinces of all coolers during the twelve month period ending January 31, 1987. It indicates that, of the 40 coolers available in Canada, WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler has grown to be the fourth largest selling cooler in less than one year. Specifically, in its first year on the market, more than 150,000 9 L Cases (or 3.6 million bottles) of WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler were sold, giving this product a 6.7% share of the total cooler sales. This makes WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler by far the fastest growing major new cooler of 1986. By January 1987, WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler was the number two selling cooler in Canada.
"13. The performance of WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler has been even more impressive regionally. The statistics in the said Cooler Tracking Report indicate in Ontario, which currently attracts over 23% of the national cooler volume, WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler is the number one brand, with sales more than double that of its next nearest competitor, Canada Cooler. In Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba, which currently account for the consumption of 36% of all coolers, WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler has a 15% share, putting it firmly in the number two spot.
"14. In addition to capturing very quickly a very large share of the cooler market in relation to its competitors, WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler has also proved to be the most popular of the four spirit based coolers introduced in 1985 and 1986 by Seagram. The said Cooler Tracking Report indicates that the sales figures for WILDBERRY Vodka Cooler outstripped those of its closest Seagram product by a ratio of approximately three to one."
(c) The nature of the wares is extremely similar. Both products are "coolers". Both are sold through the same retail outlets.
(d) Both products are sold almost exclusively through provincial liquor commissions. They will likely be displayed virtually side by side.
(e) The words of the marks are the same. The colour of the liquid and the colour scheme of the labels are similar, being purplish-red. The style of writing is different on the labels. It is clear that the Andres product is part of a family of products under the name "SPLITZ". On the other hand the WILDBERRY products appear to be a family or are intended to become part of a family of products under the mark WILDBERRY.