[10]
The substance of the affidavit of the visa officer filed on behalf of the respondent reads as follows:
"5. After an initial screening, the applicant's file was placed in the interview queue.
"6. Since the applicant had indicated on his application form that he was working and intended to work in Canada as a 'production engineer', he was asked by letter dated August 31, 1993 to have his qualifications assessed by the Canadian Council of Professional Engineers. ...
"7. By letter dated September 27, 1993, the applicant responded that he did not have an engineering degree, though he was designated as a 'production engineer' by his current employer. ...
"8. By letter dated October 21, 1993, applicant's counsel requested that the applicant be assessed as a 'Production Co-ordinator' as described in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations ('CCDO') category 4151-110.
"9. As the applicant did not have any experience as a production co-ordinator, he was advised by letter dated November 11, 1993, that his application could not be approved. However, he would be granted a personal interview if he wished. ...
"10. By facsimile dated December 10, 1993, counsel for the applicant notified the High Commission the applicant wished to be interviewed and that his intended occupation in Canada is as a Production Co-ordinator, CCDO 4151-110.
"11. I interviewed the applicant on August 23, 1994, during an area trip to Bombay. I discussed with the applicant his education, training and work experience in order to determine if there is a demand for his skills in Canada. I explained to the applicant that even if he was the most qualified person in his field, it would not be possible for me to approve his application if there was no demand in Canada for someone with these skills and experience. During the interview, I gave the applicant the opportunity to discuss at length the duties he had performed and the responsibilities he had assumed with his current and previous employers. At the conclusion of the interview, I advised the applicant that I would review his application upon return to New Delhi to determine if there is a demand in Canada for persons with his skills and experience.
"12. On August 30, 1994, I reviewed the information contained in the documents provided by the applicant and the information provided by the Applicant during the interview, in relation to various occupational categories contained in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations. My review confirmed the previous assessment that the applicant does not have any experience as a Production Co-ordinator in (CCDO 4151-110),
as he has not been involved with co-ordinating work between different units but was rather supervising the work within the single production unit
." (underlining added by me for emphasis)
The affiant went on to indicate that he had also assessed the applicant under three other employment categories, Chemist, Textile Technologist and Foreman, Synthetic Textile Mixing. He commented:
"Though the applicant is very knowledgable in his field, his experience is limited in scope. He has worked in only two organizations in the twenty-three years since he entered the labour market. Although he moved ahead within the organizations, it is always in the context of a similar type of work."
With regard to the comment, while breadth of experience is clearly a factor to be considered by those assessing applications for permanent residence in Canada, it would seem unfortunate if dedication to a particular employer resulting in progress through the ranks in employment over a considerable number of years with the same employer and depth rather than breadth of experience were assessed negatively.