 [9] 
  In her reasons, the Officer stated that there was insufficient evidence of unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship to warrant an exemption from the requirements of the Act. After having considered factors weighing positively and negatively in making her decision, the Immigration officer came to the following conclusions: 
 
 
 
 The Applicants' establishment in Canada 
 : The Officer noted that despite a long period of unemployment in Canada, the fact that the principal Applicant was now gainfully employed and that the family was integrated in the community indicated that the Applicants were established in Canada. However, she placed "little weight" on this factor, "because it has resulted form the Applicants' refusal to abide by removal orders which came into effect in summer 2003, approximately 1yr after the family's arrival. The settlement that resulted and the hardship of now uprooting the family were entirely within the Applicants' control and does not constitute undue and undeserved hardship". She further considered that "the hardship caused by voluntarily establishment to be disproportionate; all foreigners must weigh the pros and the cons of lengthy settlement in a country in which they do not benefit from permanent status". 
 
 
 
 Personalized risk facing the Applicants in Argentina 
 : The Officer found that the alleged risk represented only a small portion of the Applicants' reasons for applying for H & C considerations, and that their allegations were identical to those made before the RPD. Considering that the RPD found that the Applicants had an internal flight alternative in Argentina, the Officer gave little weight to this factor. 
 
 
 
 Emotional hardship on the parents 
 : The Officer mentioned documentary evidence regarding the parents' feelings of stress and insecurity at the prospect of returning to Argentina, but stated that she was not satisfied that their legitimate parental concerns would translate into dysfunctional parenting. While she recognized that relocation would constitute a hardship for the parents, she noted that the Applicants had demonstrated that they could be extremely resourceful, that economic conditions in Argentina had improved since their departure, and that they could benefit from the support of their families. The Officer concluded that the Applicants' legitimate parental concerns at the prospect of relocation to Argentina did not amount to unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship, and did not warrant an exemption from the requirements of the Act. 
 
 
 
 Best interests of the children affected by the outcome of the H & C decision 
 : The Officer wrote that she considered "most extensively the impact of a negative decision on the four children affected by the outcome". She addressed documentary evidence relating to the consequences of abandonment of the Canadian-born children to the Child Welfare system by their parents so that they may have better lives in Canada, but found that such a situation would result from a parental choice entirely under the Applicants' control, and would therefore not constitute hardship that is unusual and undeserved or disproportionate. The Officer then considered the eventuality of relocation to Argentina as a family unit, which she considered a more likely outcome. She stated that her analysis was guided by Citizenship and Immigration Canada's Internal Processing Manual (IP5), specifically subsection 5.19, which pertains to the best interest of the children. After considering the Applicants' submissions regarding the poor quality of education, the children's exposure to poverty and violence and other factors relating to the conditions in Argentina, she concluded that they did not amount to hardship that is undeserved and unusual or disproportionate. 
 
 
 