 [8] 
  After describing the allegations underlying the Applicant's claim, the Board's brief analysis is in the following terms. 
 
 
 
 Relying on the independent documentary evidence, I find that although there are problems with generalized criminality in Trinidad, the government in that parliamentary democracy is making strong efforts to provide adequate state protection for its citizens. I am not satisfied within the preponderance of probability category, as I must be, that the state of Trinidad would not be reasonably forthcoming with serious efforts to protect a citizen who returned and approached the state for protection. I find that Canada's protection is not necessary. 
 
 
 
 The evidence of the claimant is that he last went to the authorities in the 1980s and has never again sought state protection because none was forthcoming more than 20 years ago when he was a very young child. I am not persuaded that the claimant, an experienced man of 25 years of age who was employed in Trinidad and able to travel abroad with a band representing the culture of Trinidad, would not be able to live independently and seek state protection if Randolph [his father] assaulted him. 
 
 
 
 Further, I find that the problems experienced in Trinidad by the claimant were neither so appalling nor atrocious that he could be found in need of refugee protection based on compelling reasons. 
 
 
 
 The RPD does not have a mandate to consider family reunification so that the claimant can be reunited with his mother who left Trinidad in 2000 or with his half-siblings who are Convention refugees in Canada. Further, I am not persuaded by the particulars of the mother's claim that included her minor children, that this adult male claimant is a person who could not avail protection in Trinidad today if he were threatened by Randolph. 
 
 
 
 The claimant's allegations that there is no adequate state protection available in Trinidad was not supported by any clear and convincing evidence. Therefore, the presumption of adequate state protection being available in the parliamentary democracy of Trinidad has not been rebutted. 
 
 
 
 There was no evidence provided that the government is in chaos or disarray and unable to protect its citizens and the claimant's burden of proof is directly proportional to the level of democracy. No government is expected to be able to protect all of its citizens at all times nor is it expected to provide perfect protection. 
 
 
 
 [footnoted references to documentary evidence before the Board and citations omitted] 
 
 
 