 [5] 
  Here the substantive issue is that of the thoroughness of the investigation by the Commission of the Applicant's complaint. It is clear from the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in  
 Sketchley v. Canada (Attorney General) 
 , [2006] 3 F.C.R. 392; 344 N.R. 257 (F.C.A.) that failure by administrative decision makers to investigate obviously crucial evidence where an omission has been made that cannot be compensated for by making further submissions, there has been a lack of procedural fairness such that the decision must be set aside. To quote from paragraphs 120 and 121 of  
 Sketchley 
  which in turn quotes from  
 Slattery v. Canadian Human Rights Commission 
 , [1994] 2 F.C. 574; 73 F.T.R. 161 (T.D.), affd. (1996), 205 N.R. 383 (F.C.A.) and  
 Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817; 243 N.R. 22: 
 
 
 
 "120. In  
 Slattery 
 , supra, the Applications Judge considered the degree of thoroughness of investigation required to satisfy the rules of procedural fairness in this context. He noted the 'essential role that investigators play in determining the merits of particular complaints' (para. 53), and also the competing interests of individual complainants and the administrative apparatus as a whole (para. 55). He concluded as follows: 
 
 
 
 '56. Deference must be given to administrative decision-makers to assess the probative value of evidence and to decide to further investigate or not to further investigate accordingly. It should only be where unreasonable omissions are made, for example where an investigator failed to investigate obviously crucial evidence, that judicial review is warranted ... 
 
 
 
 '57. In contexts where parties have the legal right to make submissions in response to an investigator's report, such as in the case at bar, parties may be able to compensate for more minor omissions by bringing such omissions to the attention of the decision-maker. Therefore, it should be only where complainants are unable to rectify such omissions that judicial review would be warranted. Although this is by no means an exhaustive list, it would seem to me that circumstances where further submissions cannot compensate for an investigator's omissions would include: (1) where the omission is of such a fundamental nature that merely drawing the decision-maker's attention to the omission cannot compensate for it; or (2) where fundamental evidence is inaccessible to the decision-maker by virtue of the protected nature of the information or where the decision-maker explicitly disregards it.' 
 
 
 
 "121. Weighing the  
 Baker 
  factors, I agree that this is an appropriate description of the content of procedural fairness in this context."