[10]
In his affidavit filed December 23, 1985, the applicant swore to the truth of these passages:
"2. That I was sentenced to a term of seven years imprisonment for importing a narcotic with a street value of $25,000 on May 30th, 1984, with a recommendation by the learned trial judge [as is clearly shown in Ex. H] that I serve my sentence at William Head Prison which is a medium-minimum security rated prison.
"4. That on the 20th day of July, 1984, the National Parole Board notified me by letter that I was eligible for Unescorted Temporary Absences on 30 July, 1985; for Day Parole on 30 July 1985 and for Full Parole on 29 September, 1985. Exhibit 'B' to this my affidavit.
"5. That I applied to the National Parole Board for Day Parole on the 21st day of March, 1985 and my application was acknowledged by a letter dated 10 April, 1985. This letter informed me that the Board would make a decision without conducting a personal interview. Exhibit 'C' to this my affidavit.
"9. That I was denied a hearing for Day Parole by the National Parole Board and instead, on October 18, 1985, the Board by means of a 'Paper Panel Info Shared Assistant' denied me Day Parole. Exhibit 'G' to this my affidavit.
"11. That the National Parole Board completely ignored all representations made on my behalf and all of the postive things I have accomplished since my arrest, conviction and subsequent imprisonment.
"12. That I have been on Escorted Temporary Absences since June 1985 and have completed each and every absence successfully. I have received eight hours per month E.T.A. to visit with my family who are completely supportive of me.
"13. That I was on Bail from September, 1982 until May, 1984 while awaiting trial. I abided by all of the conditions of my release.
"14. That I was only 20 years of age at the time I was charged with my criminal offence.
"15. That I am a first offender and had never been in conflict with the law up to the time of the offence for which I was convicted.
"16. That I have attended university while in prison and have earned 78 credits towards my degree in communications. Exhibit 'I' to this my affidavit.
"17. That I have maintained an - A average in my university courses at William Head and will continue until graduation at Simon Fraser University. Exhibit 'J' to this my affidavit.
"18. That my Case Management Team which consists of Living Unit Officer [named], my Living Unit Development Officer, [named] and my Parole Officer, [named], who have known me since my incarceration at William Head, all fully supported me for Day Parole. None of my team were present when the Parole Board were making their decision and none of my Team were able to present their arguments on my behalf orally.
"19. I have never seen or talked to any member of the National Parole Board.
"20. I belong to the Laren Society and I have been accepted to reside at the Bill Mudge Residence - their halfway House - if I were to receive a Day Parole.
"21. I attend the weekly meetings of the John Howard Society held at William Head and I have been accepted by the John Howard Society to reside at their halfway house - Manchester House - if I were to receive a Day Parole.
"22. That on page 11 and 12 of 'A Guide to Conditional Release for Pentitentiary Inmates' issued by the National Parole Board to prisoners, it states the 'Factors Considered.' If the board considered these factors, I would have received a Day Parole. Exhibit 'K' to this my affidavit.
"23. That I verily believe that the National Parole Board by denying me an in-person hearing, failed to act in a fair manner and I was denied fundamental justice.
"24. That I verily believe that if I were given the opportunity and my Case Management Team were given the opportunity to present my case for Day Parole at an inperson hearing, I would be granted Day Parole."