[31]
In cases of such requests the inmate is the actor who, in effect, places his own progress and behaviour before the Parole Board in order to persuade it to grant the request. Naturally, the board must and may examine that progress, if any, and that behaviour so that it may properly exercise its discretion. This may be contrasted with revocation proceedings in which the board is the actor in calling upon the parolee, in effect, to explain his reported misbehaviour, failing justification for which he may be returned to prison. However, in neither case may the board act upon reports (with certain exceptions) known only to it and not to the prisoner or parolee as the case may be. When, as here, all the materials in use are available and known to the applicant and he asserts no wish to add to them or to make any written explantions beyond what he has submitted, the principles of fundamental justice do not demand that he must also have the occasion to make oral submissions to elaborate further the written submissions filed in a process which he has himself initiated. But for parole (and mandatory supervision) each inmate would be properly obliged to serve the appropriate term of imprisonment imposed by lawful sentence of the court. It is the applicant who seeks, by discretionary exception, to be relieved of that proper obligation. It is not the board which is seeking to abort or take away any qualified liberty already accorded to the applicant. The applicant's progress in prison, the behaviour or misbehaviour, and the initiation of the application for day parole are all in the applicant's hands. The applicant needs no right of oral presentation or of reply in person since it is his application alone, including the favourable case management reports in this case, which are before the board. Content with that documentation, the applicant made no further submissions. In these circumstances the lack of an oral hearing is quite unexceptionable. If certainly does not transgress on the principles of fundamental justice.