[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application under s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
for:
1) an order in the nature of certiorari quashing the decision of a visa officer dated September 12, 1994, refusing the applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada;
2) an order in the nature of mandamus directing that the respondents, the Minister of Employment and Immigration and the Secretary of State for External Affairs:
a) consider and process the applicant's application for permanent residence in accordance with the
Immigration Act
and
Immigration Regulations
;
b) determine in accordance with the law, whether or not it would be contrary to the
Immigration Act
and
Immigration Regulations
, to grant the applicant landing in Canada and properly apply the
Immigration Regulations
in accessing the applicant with an adequate allocation of points in order to meet the selection criteria; and
3) an order in the nature of mandamus directing that the applicant's application for permanent residence be reassessed at a different visa office and/or by a different visa officer.
Background
[2]
The applicant is a 41 year old male resident and citizen of Trinidad. He is employed as a body-man (straightener) in an auto body shop. The applicant and his family (wife and daughter) were refugee claimants in the backlog and were in Canada for several years. They were issued departure notices and in compliance with the departure notices returned to Trinidad.
[3]
By letter dated March 22, 1993, the applicant submitted an application for permanent residence in Canada to the Canadian High Commission (Commission) in Port of Spain, Trinidad. In this application, he indicated that he had relatives in Canada willing to assist him.
[4]
This application, as stated, was received by the Commission on March 29, 1993. With this application was a Manager's cheque no. 008111 in the amount of $1,723.15 (Trinidad dollars) made payable to the Receiver General (paragraph 4, affidavit of Hamel-Smith).
[5]
By letter dated April 23, 1993, the Commission, in Port of Spain, advised the applicant that they were unable to accept the Manager's cheque for $1,723.15 TT dollars and were returning the cheque. The letter informed the applicant that the cheque should be made payable to the Canadian High Commission if in TT dollars and the Receiver General for Canada if in Canadian dollars and a new fee schedule was enclosed. The letter also advised the applicant that:
"We have made an informal evaluation of your ability to meet the requirements for permanent residence in Canada. After careful consideration of all the information you have provided we regret that you appear to be unable to meet the current criteria for admission to Canada as there is zero units of assessment for the factor of occupational demand in your intended occupation in Canada. We cannot, therefore, encourage you to submit a formal application at this time.
"The choice of how to proceed with your application is yours. Should you wish a formal assessment of your application you must pay the appropriate fee."
[6]
The applicant indicated that he did not resubmit the processing fee because he felt the matter was not worth pursuing in light of the above-noted letter (see paragraph 4 Maharaj affidavit).
[7]
Nevertheless, the applicant did submit to the Commission a letter, received by the Commission on May 25, 1993, wherein he states:
"I recive your letter on the 14-5-93 I inquiry about my application choice is I want to or if my padors Mr. Mrs. Paul Melinichuk 1901 Jane Street B04 H10 Station W. Toronto Canada is willing support me and family to sign bond for several years and also my sister Mr Mrs Roland Geeta Bisnath No. 110 Alton Towers Circle Unit 132 Scarborough Ontario Toronto Canada is willing to support and sign also bond for several years. I will recive letter from my sponsors in one two weektime.
Dear Sir. Madam.
B. Hamel Smith.
"I will hear from you soon. thank you.
my fee will be $900.00 hundred canadian dollars for me and my family.
'Deopersad Maharaj'"
(copied exactly as written)
[8]
Ms. Hamel-Smith states, in paragraph 6 of her affidavit, that by letter of May 25, 1993, "the applicant advised the Commission that he intended to pursue his application for permanent residence and that he would submit the cost recovery fee".
[9]
Obviously, the above is Ms. Hamel-Smith's interpretation of the May 25, 1993 letter.
[10]
As a result, I am satisfied, of the May 25, 1993 letter and of its interpretation by Ms. Hamel-Smith, the Commission, on October 19, 1993, wrote to the applicant indicating that:
"On 23 April, 1993, you were asked to produce the following documents or information to enable us to continue the processing of your application:
The cost recovery fee.
To date, we have not yet received any communication from you."
[11]
The letter also advised that if the applicant did not respond within three months, his file would be closed.
[12]
The applicant indicated that in light of the above letter, he thought his application was processed successfully and paid the processing fee on November 8, 1993.
[13]
The applicant was assessed effective November 1993 with a total of 54 units, with o units for education. The applicant has eight years of elementary or primary schooling.
[14]
By letter dated September 12, 1994, the applicant was advised of the refusal of his application for permanent residence in Canada. The letter provided in part:
"I have now completed the assessment of your application and regret to inform you that it has been determined that you do not meet the requirements for immigration to Canada, notwithstanding the assistance offered by your relative in Canada.
"Pursuant to subsection 10(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, assisted relatives, the class in which you have applied, are assessed on the basis of education, vocational preparation, experience, occupational demand, arranged employment or designated occupation, Canadian demographic factors, age, knowledge of English and French languages, personal suitability, and the presence of relatives in Canada. You were assessed based on the requirement for the following occupation: Auto Body Repairer.
"Subparagraph 9(1)(b)(ii) of the
Immigration Regulations
does not permit issuance of an immigrant visa to an applicant who has not been awarded sufficient units of assessment to be accepted. Unfortunately, you have failed to receive the minimum number of units required."
Applicant's Position
[15]
The applicant's position, as I understand it, is that since he filed his application for permanent residence together with a Manager's cheque payable to the Receiver General, even if in TT dollars, the "lock-in" date for the application is March 1993 and that the "processing date" of the application should be and could only be November 8, 1993 when he paid the processing fee.
[16]
Counsel for the applicant states that in March of 1993, the applicant would have been awarded eight units for education and therefore, in November 1993 he should be awarded the same eight units notwithstanding the fact that effective August 9, 1993, an amendment to the
Immigration Regulations
provided, among other things, that where a diploma from a secondary school has not been completed, the applicant is to be assessed 0 units. On the other hand, in March 1993, the applicant would receive no units for occupation while in November 1993, he would be awarded 1 unit.
[17]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant should benefit by the assessment that would have been made for education in March 1993 and for occupation for the assessment made in November 1993.
[18]
In the November 1993 assessment, the applicant received 54 units with 0 units for education. If the applicant were to be awarded the eight units he would have obtained in March 1993, in the November 1993 assessment, he would have received a total of 62 units entitling him to an interview to determine unit allocation for personal suitability.
[19]
Therefore, submits the applicant, the visa officer did not review the applicant's application in accordance with the law, particularly ss. 11.1(a) and 11(3) of the
Immigration Regulations
or the principles of natural justice. The applicant maintains that the officer sent misleading letters requesting the application fee, did not accept original payment of the fee when they should have and did not interview the applicant.
Respondent's Position
[20]
The respondent submits that on the facts of this case, the application was not "duly initiated" until the application fee was properly paid, and therefore the assessment as at November 1993, after the amendment to the
Immigration Regulations
, was a proper assessment. Further, as the applicant only scored 54 units, there was no obligation to interview him.
Comments
[21]
Section 17 of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, amendment, SOR/93-412, effective August 9, 1993 provides in part:
"17. All portions of item 1 of Schedule I to the said Regulations in columns II and III thereof is revoked and the following substituted therefore:
Column II							Column III
Criteria							Maximum Units
1. (1) Subject to
subsection (2) to     16
to (4), units of
assessment shall
awarded as follows:
(a) where a diploma from a
secondary school has not been
completed, zero units
..."
[22]
As I indicated earlier, the applicant has 8 years of elementary or primary schooling. Therefore, had he been assessed prior to August 9, 1993, the applicant would have been awarded eight units for education. However, in the case before me the assessment was made in November of 1993. As such, the applicant was assessed 0 units for education. Therefore, what is critical to the judicial review before me is a determination of when the applicant made his application for an immigrant visa. If the application was made prior to August 9, 1993, in this case the argument being that the application was made in March of 1993, then the applicant would have been assessed at 62 points (54 plus the 8 for education), and under the
Immigration Regulations
and jurisprudence would have to have been granted an interview. The jurisprudence is also clear that personal suitability cannot be assessed without interviewing the individual. On the other hand, if the applicant's application was made in November of 1993, there is no evidence to show that the applicant was improperly assessed or that the visa officer committed a reviewable error and therefore there is no basis for me to interfere with the visa officer's decision.
[23]
In this regard, note should be taken of the Court of Appeal's decision in
Choi v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1991), 139 N.R. 182; 15 Imm. L.R.(2d) 265 (F.C.A.). In that case, the applicant inquired on October 13, 1987, how to apply for permanent residence. He was provided with a preapplication questionnaire (PAQ), but was not told he could make a formal application immediately if he so wished. The applicant returned the PAQ on October 16, 1987, received a formal application form and returned it on November 6, 1987. Effective November 2, 1987, the occupational demand for the applicant's skill was reduced from 10 units to one unit. The applicant received 65 units, five units less than the total required for the issuance of a visa to an independent immigrant. The Court of Appeal found that the "lock-in" date for occupational assessment is the date when the process leading to the issuance or refusal of the visa is initiated, which was October 16th, not November 6th. In its reasons at page 268, the Court of Appeal noted its decision in
Wong v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1986), 64 N.R. 309 (F.C.A.), and Mahoney, J.A.'s, comments at p. 311:
"... that an application for an immigrant visa is made when it duly initiates the process leading to the issue or refusal of the visa and not only when that processing is committed to the particular official authorized to dispose of the application."
[24]
The Court of Appeal continued at pp. 268 and 269:
"Any other date except the date of application would be purely arbitrary as a 'lock-in' date for the occupational demand factor, depending solely on the vagaries of the administrative process. The application date is the only date within the control of the applicant, and is consequently the only date that can be established without arbitrariness.
. . . . .
"In light of
Wong
, supra, I must give effect to this new argument presented by the appellant that the 'lock-in' date for occupational assessment has always rightly been the date of the receipt, by the department, of the application."
[25]
And at pp. 270 to 271 noted:
"It is true that there may be an advantage to applicants, too, in not proceeding with an application immediately. Through a P.A.Q., they can get a ruling on their case at no cost to themselves, since the requisite fee is submitted only with the application. But that is surely a choice that should be made by the applicants themselves, and not by the government for them. The government owes it to the applicants, and its own integrity, to present the full picture to applicants, so that, being in possession of the ground rules, they can make their own judgments as to how they want to proceed.
"In
Tsiafakis v. Canada (Minister of Manpower and Immigration)
, [1977] 2 F.C. 216; 73 D.L.R.(3d) 139 (C.A.), at p. 146 [D.L.R.], LeDain, J.A., held for this court as follows:
'[A] person who seeks to sponsor someone for admission to Canada has a right to make an application for his admission in the prescribed form and to have his right to sponsor determined upon the basis of such an application. Since such a right cannot be exercised unless the prescribed form can be obtained from the immigration authorities there is a correlative duty to provide the form.'
"A similar correlative duty might, perhaps, be said to exist in the case at bar, but, at the very least, when the Canadian government, through its agents, undertakes to supply information to immigration applicants as to how to become immigrants, it assumes a duty to provide this information accurately. This does not imply Canadian authorities must provide a detailed exegesis of Canadian immigration law and procedures, or legal advice to prospective immigrants as to the legal significance of the available options, but it does mean that the immigration authorities have an obligation in fairness to provide basic information on the methods of application, and to make available the appropriate forms.
"Fairness may, perhaps, require no more than the accurate presentation of information. But it surely demands that much. ..."
[26]
It is clear from the Court of Appeal's comments that the assessment date or "lock-in date" is the date of the application. The question becomes, what makes up an application, is it the application alone or is it the application together with payment of the requisite fee. In
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED it was held that the assessment date or lock-in date for determining the number of points to be awarded is the date of the original application and payment of the processing fee as opposed to the date the application was actually reviewed.
[27]
In the case before me, the applicant attempted to make his payment together with his application, however his cheque was not accepted because it was not made out in the proper funds to the proper party. The cheque was returned to the applicant. He did nothing to pay the required processing fee until November 1993. The
Immigration Act Fees Regulations
state in s. 3(2):
"3(2) The fee prescribed in paragraph 1(b) of the schedule is payable, at the time an application for landing or an application for landing in Canada requiring visa exemption is made, by an applicant who is not described in subsection (1)."
[28]
The applicant is not a person described in s. 3(1). Therefore, it would appear that the fee is required at the time an application for landing is filed for it to be "properly" filed.
[29]
I must conclude that the applicant's application could not be processed until it is perfected, that is to say, until such time as the required fee was paid. The required fee was paid in November 1993 and I am satisfied that November 1993 is the "lock-in" date.
[30]
The applicant has raised the issue of reasonable expectation. The applicant submits that when the Commission returned on April 23, 1993, the funds paid by the applicant with his application, he was told that after an informal assessment, it appeared he did not qualify and if the Commission heard nothing further, his file would be closed in one month's time. On October 19, 1993, the Commission sent the applicant a letter indicating that they were waiting for the application fee and that if it was not paid then the file would be closed in three months.
[31]
The applicant states he believes his file was still active and that if he paid the fee "then my papers would be processed" .... "I thought my case was being processed successfully" and as a result, the applicant paid his fees, as I have said, on November 8, 1993.
[32]
I cannot agree that there was any statement made in any of the letters sent to the applicant by the Commission that would, in any way, indicate that if the applicant paid the required fees his application would have been successfully processed.
[33]
I am satisfied that there does not exist any document or letter that, even remotely, could have indicated to the applicant that he would have a successfully processed application if and when he paid the required fee.
[34]
It may have been wishful thinking on the part of the applicant.
[35]
For the above reasons, the present application for judicial review is denied.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm
[End of document]
