[9]
First, I agree with Justice Snider's conclusion that a citizenship appeal can be granted for failure to provide a proper analysis of the evidence. I consider this requirement of a citizenship judge to be a fundamental part of the duty of fairness. Second, I accept the proposition advanced by the Respondent that there is no hard and fast rule that important factors have to addressed in the manner and order which Justice Reed suggests, but, nevertheless, the decision must leave no doubt that all important relevant factors were addressed in reaching the decision. Support for this conclusion comes from the "Citizenship Policy Manual (CP2) on Decision-Making" which sets out detailed expectations to be followed by citizenship judges. In part, the Manual reads as follows, with particular emphasis placed on features 1.27 and 1.28:
"
1.3. Concepts
When citizenship judges make a decision they must be sure that:
- they have the legal authority to make the decision; and
- the decision follows the administrative law principles of natural justice and procedural fairness.
. . . . .
"
1.6. Appeal
The Act authorizes an appeal of the decision of a citizenship judge to the Federal Court of Canada - Trial Division. This appeal is not de novo, meaning that only the evidence examined by the citizenship judge is admissible in court. When the Federal Court hears an appeal, it:
- examines the merits of the decision;
- determines whether it was the correct decision.
. . . . .
Natural justice and procedural fairness
"
1.10. Decision-maker
It is an administrative law principle that, in the absence of a legislative provision to the contrary, the decision-maker is master of the decision-making process. Depending on the nature of the decision, a fairly high degree of procedural fairness is required. A decision likely to affect the rights of an individual (for example, deportation), requires more procedural guarantees than a decision that does not affect an individual's status.
"
1.11. Method can be more important than decision
In administrative law, the way a decision is made is often more important than the decision itself. Consequently, the decision-maker (the citizenship judge) always has a duty to act fairly and in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
"
1.12. Basic elements of natural justice
The duty to act fairly includes rights and obligations that must be observed.
The two basic elements of natural justice are
- the right to be heard, and
- impartiality.
. . . . .
"
1.18. All the evidence must be heard
The judge must take all pertinent information and evidence into account, no matter how extensive. The judge must assess the applicant's credibility and may require additional documentation to support certain statements, such as a claim of residence in Canada during the four years preceding the application. If the evidence is rejected because of a lack of credibility, the decision must give the reasons.
. . . . .
"
1.24. Types of bias
The following are examples of situations that may show bias:
- commenting on a question before the hearing;
- attitudes revealing prejudices: the application must be studied impartially and without regard to what the decision-maker considers to be a good citizen;
- prior involvement in the case;
- a relationship between the decision-maker and one of the parties;
- marked hostility toward one of the parties;
- possibility of financial benefit from the outcome of the proceedings.
"
1.25. Deal with each case on individual basis
Examine each case on an individual basis. Circumstances that are bias in one case may not be bias in another case.
Content of the decision
"
1.26. Give reasons for decision
When the judge does not approve an application, the judgment:
- tells the applicant that the application is not approved;
- gives full reasons for the decision;
- presents the reasons for the decision so the applicant or the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration can decide whether to appeal the decision.
"
1.27. What to include in justifying the decision
The decision must include:
- the facts;
- an analysis of the facts; and
- the deductions from the analysis.
"
1.28. Conclusion not enough
Giving a conclusion and repeating the criteria set out in the Citizenship Act is not enough. The arguments and the evidence must be discussed. The judge must then show why the decision was made, and state the evidence supporting the decision.
" (Emphasis added)
(Court Registry File in the present case)
Therefore, I find that a most important part of a decision rendered by a citizenship judge is a statement of
why
any stated conclusion is reached; while this might be difficult, I find it is, nevertheless, absolutely necessary to accord fairness to an applicant.