[10]
In the present case, in each of the decisions rendered, the Citizenship Judge stated facts found with respect to each member of the family, but by way of analysis of these facts, made the same statement in each decision rendered as follows:
"In determining whether you have demonstrated that Canada is the country in which you have centralized your mode of existence, I have considered those questions posed by Justice Reed in rendering the decision
Re: Koo
(1992), 19 Imm. L.R.(2d) 1; 59 F.T.R. 27; (1993), 1 F.C. 286 (T.D.).
. . . . .
"The primary questions to be dealt with are, the degree to which you have centralized your life in Canada and the degree to which the time you have spent in Canada will have allowed you to become Canadian by living and working with Canadians, and becoming part of Canadian society.
"Your time in Canada does not demonstrate that you have actually spent enough time in this country to fulfil the intent of the
Citizenship Act
. You have not centralized your life in this country. You absences appear to be structural. That is, they appear to be a pattern of life rather than a temporary phenomenon. They are not related to a humanitarian emergency, the temporary assignment of overseas duties to an employee of a Canadian company, a unique educational program, or assignment by the Canadian government to overseas duties.
. . . . .
"The intent of the
Citizenship Act
is clear. You have not sufficiently centralized your life in Canada, living among Canadians, and becoming part of Canadian society.
. . . . .
"The Parliament of Canada allowed a four year period within which an applicant could establish the three years of residency. This was done in order to allow for some absences during that four year period. In
RE:
KOO
(Bearing File no. T-20-92
) Justice B. Reed comments upon the intention of Parliament in setting this period:
'The requirement of three years residence within a four year period seems to have been designed to allow for one year's physical absence during the four year period. Certainly the debates of the period suggest that physical presence in Canada for 1095 days was contemplated as a minimum.'
Pursuant to s. 14(3) of the
Citizenship Act
, you are therefore, advised that, for the above reasons, your application for citizenship is not approved."
(See Applicant's Tribunal Record, pp. 143-145)