[25]
The sentence he was given under the U.S. judgment dated August 24, 2000, is composed of a term of imprisonment of 60 to 71 months and a period of post-release supervision of four to five years. It is true, as the applicant submits, that
Chan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship)
, supra, of the Court of Appeal adopted the principle that a person serving his entire sentence cannot be excluded under section F(b) of the
Convention
. At paragraph 41, Mr. Justice Robertson writes:
"Assuming without deciding that the appellant's conviction qualifies as a serious non-political crime, it is clear to me that Article 1F(b) cannot be invoked in cases where a refugee claimant has been convicted of a crime and served his or her sentence outside Canada prior to his or her arrival in this country."
However, these comments were qualified to a considerable degree by Mr. Justice Nadon in
Zrig
, supra, at paragraphs 118 to 129, and particularly in paragraph 128:
"In short, in
Chan
the Court was dealing with a different situation and the comments it made on Article 1F(b) of the
Convention
must be read with caution, as the very wording of that article indicates that it applies to more than the cases covered by Canadian law in the three aforementioned sections. There is also no question, as the Court held in
Chan
, that the country of refuge can certainly decide not to exclude the perpetrator of a serious non-political crime who has already been convicted and has served his sentence. However, I do not think the Court decided that the country of refuge could not decide to exclude the perpetrator of a serious non-political crime, whatever the circumstances, provided he has been convicted and has served his sentence."
In any event, it appears from the evidence that the applicant has not yet served his sentence in full. The four- to five-year probation period that was to follow the period of imprisonment was not served and the record indicates that surveillance of the applicant would be resume if he were to set foot again in the United States. The page of the U.S. judgment entitled "Special Conditions of Supervision" reads:
"If deported, the defendant is not to re-enter the United States illegally. If the defendant is deported during the period of probation or the supervised release term, supervision by the probation office becomes inactive. If the defendant returns, the defendant shall report to the nearest U.S. Probation Office immediately. Supervision by the probation office reactivates automatically upon the defendant reporting."
For these reasons, I am of the opinion that the applicant has not yet even fully served his sentence.