 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Com. Credit Union v. Reg. of TM (2006), 300 F.T.R. 35 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2006] F.T.R. TBEd. SE.038 
 
 
 
 Community Credit Union Ltd. (applicant) v. Registrar of Trademarks, Credit Union Central of Canada and Community Savings Credit Union (respondents) 
 
 (T-1568-05; 2006 FC 1119) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Community Credit Union Ltd. v. Registrar of Trademarks et al. 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Mosley, J. 
 
 September 19, 2006. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 The applicant sought to register the trademark "Community Credit Union" for use with credit union services. The Registrar of Trademarks refused the application. The applicant appealed from the Registrar's decision pursuant to s. 56 of the Trade-marks Act. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court dismissed the appeal. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 261 
 
 Trademarks - What trademarks registrable - Prohibition - Marks which are descriptive of the product - The applicant sought to register the trademark "Community Credit Union" for use with credit union services - The Registrar of Trademarks refused the application on the ground, inter alia, that the words "Community Credit Union" were inherently non-distinctive - The applicant appealed pursuant to s. 56 of the Trade-marks Act - The applicant argued that the Registrar erred in failing to determine that the mark was not clearly descriptive of a character or quality of the services as that would have been instrumental to any determination of non-distinctiveness - The Federal Court rejected the argument - A finding of descriptiveness was not instrumental to a finding of non-distinctiveness - The two were separate grounds of opposition - The Registrar concluded that it was not necessary to deal with the ground of opposition based on descriptiveness as the application was refused on other grounds - It was not unreasonable to have done so - In any event, the court was satisfied that the mark was clearly descriptive of the character of the services to be provided - See paragraphs 24 to 30. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 261 
 
 Trademarks - What trademarks registrable - Prohibition - Marks which are descriptive of the product - The applicant sought to register the trademark "Community Credit Union" for use with credit union services - The Federal Court held that the mark was clearly descriptive of the character of the services to be provided in association with its use - The court stated that "One cannot obtain an exclusive proprietary right in an ordinary word that aptly describes the services of others ... registration of the mark Community Credit Union would remove the word 'community' from the vocabulary available to others providing the services of a credit union" - See paragraphs 28 to 30. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 265 
 
 Trademarks - What trademarks registrable - Distinctive marks - General - The applicant sought to register the trademark "Community Credit Union" for use with credit union services - The Registrar of Trademarks refused the application on the ground, inter alia, that the words "Community Credit Union" were inherently non-distinctive because there were many credit unions in Canada that used "Community Credit Union" in their trade names or trademarks - The Registrar also concluded that the evidence showed only that the mark may have acquired distinctiveness in some parts of Alberta, but there was no evidence that the mark had acquired distinctiveness throughout Canada - The applicant appealed pursuant to s. 56 of the Trade-marks Act - The Federal Court dismissed the appeal - The Registrar did not err in finding an absence of distinctiveness - See paragraphs 31 to 37. 
 
 
 
 Trademarks, Names and Designs - Topic 707 
 
 Trademarks - Registration - General - Conditions precedent - Requirement of use - The applicant sought to register the trademark "Community Credit Union" for use with credit union services - The Registrar of Trademarks refused the application on the ground, inter alia, that the applicant failed to file evidence which established its claimed date of first use (November 1986) - The applicant appealed pursuant to s. 56 of the Trade-marks Act and submitted new evidence - The Federal Court dismissed the appeal - Except for two advertisements dated October 1986, all of the exhibits were either undated or dated from after the claimed date of first use - While the October 1986 advertisements demonstrated an effort to use the words "Community Credit Union" as a means of self identification, neither displayed the mark as it was framed in the trademark application, i.e., they did not show use of Community Credit Union as a trademark - The applicant had not clearly established its use of the mark by November 1986 and the court was not satisfied that the new evidence would have materially affected the Registrar's findings - See paragraphs 15 to 23. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
 Telus Corp. et al. v. Orange Personal Communications Services Ltd. (2005), 273 F.T.R. 228; 39 C.P.R.(4th) 389; 2005 FC 590, refd to. [para. 11]. 
 
 Garbo Group Inc. et al. v. Brown (Harriet) & Co. et al. (1999), 176 F.T.R. 80; 3 C.P.R.(4th) 224 (T.D.), refd to. [para. 12]. 
 
 Molson Breweries, A Partnership v. Labatt (John) Ltd. et al., [2000] 3 F.C. 145; 252 N.R. 91; 5 C.P.R.(4th) 180 (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 13]. 
 
 Wrangler Apparel Corp. v. Timberland Co. (2005), 272 F.T.R. 270; 41 C.P.R.(4th) 223; 2005 FC 722, refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
  Ryan v. Law Society of New Brunswick, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 247; 302 N.R. 1; 257 N.B.R.(2d) 207; 674 A.P.R. 207; 2003 SCC 20, refd to. [para. 14]. 
 
 Conde Nast Publications Inc. v. Union des Editions Modernes (1979), 46 C.P.R.(2d) 183 (F.C.T.D.), refd to. [para. 15]. 
 
 Vivat Holdings Ltd. v. Levi Strauss & Co. (2005), 276 F.T.R. 40; 2005 FC 707, refd to. [para. 22]. 
 
 Canadian Council of Professional Engineers v. APA - The Engineered Wood Association (2000), 184 F.T.R. 55 (T.D.), refd to. [para. 26]. 
 
 Partlo v. Todd (1888), 17 S.C.R. 196, refd to. [para. 29]. 
 
 Mitel Corp. v. Registrar of Trademarks (1984), 79 C.P.R.(2d) 202 (F.C.T.D.), refd to. [para. 29]. 
 
 Muffin Houses Inc. v. The Muffin House Bakery Ltd. (1985), 4 C.P.R.(3d) 272 (T.M. Opp. Bd.), refd to. [para. 35]. 
 
 
 
 Authors and Works Noticed: 
 
 Hughes on Trade Marks (2nd Ed. 2005), p. 648 [para. 33]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Neil Kathol, for the applicant; 
 
 Jane Steinberg, for the respondent, Credit Union Central of Canada; 
 
 David Wotherspoon, for the respondent, Community Savings Credit Union. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Brownlee LLP, Calgary Alberta, for the applicant; 
 
 Gowling Lafleur Henderson LLP, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent, Credit Union Central of Canada; 
 
 Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the respondent, Community Savings Credit Union; 
 
 John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the Registrar of Trademarks. 
 
 
 
 This appeal was heard on September 13, 2006, at Calgary, Alberta, before Mosley, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following decision on September 19, 2006. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Mosley, J. 
 : This is an application for an appeal pursuant to section 56 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (the " 
 Act 
 "), to set aside the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks, dated July 13, 2005, refusing an application to register the trademark Community Credit Union. 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicant, Community Credit Union Ltd. ("CCU"), was formerly known as "Medicine Hat Savings & Credit Union Ltd". In 1986, as it was operating in other towns in southern Alberta and wished to emphasize its local business base, the firm decided to create a new image or "brand". It chose the name Community Credit Union. While the evidence indicates that the applicant began to use that name late in 1986, it did not change its corporate name until February 11, 1994. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  The respondent, Credit Union Central of Canada ("Central"), is the national trade association for the credit union system in Canada. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The respondent, Community Savings Credit Union ("Savings"), was established in 1944 under the trade name I.W.A. (New Westminster) Credit Union. On April 12, 1979 it changed its name to I.W.A. and Community Credit Union. On November 16, 1998, it changed its name again, to its present name of Community Savings Credit Union. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  On June 29, 1999 the applicant sought to register the mark "Community Credit Union" (the "mark") for use with credit union services. At that time, CCU was the owner of the trademark Community Credit Union & Design filed in February, 1996 and registered in September, 1997. The applicant maintains that it was not aware that the words, "Community Credit Union" had been disclaimed in the application for the design registration, until sometime after the trademark was registered. This prompted the application for registration of the mark, and publication for opposition purposes in the trademarks journal of June 7, 2000. On December 12, 2000 both respondents (then opponents), each filed a statement of opposition against the mark application. 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The grounds of opposition, although filed separately, are substantially similar and can be summarized as follows: 
 
 
 
 1. The mark application did not comply with the requirements of subsection 30(i) of the  
 Act 
  (raised by Central only). 
 
 
 
 2. The mark application did not comply with the requirements of subsection 30(b) of the  
 Act 
  because the applicant had not used to the alleged trademark since the date claimed in the application. 
 
 
 
 3. The alleged trademark was not registrable within the meanings of paragraphs 12(1)(b) and (c), because the words "Community Credit Union" were descriptive of the services recited in the mark application. 
 
 
 
 4. The alleged trademark was not distinctive within the meaning of section 2 of the  
 Act 
 . 
 
 
 
 5. The applicant was not entitled to register the trademark pursuant to paragraph 16(1)(a) of the  
 Act 
  (raised by Savings only). 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  In her decision dated July 13, 2005, the Trademarks Opposition Board member (board member) came to the following conclusions regarding each ground of opposition:. 
 
 
 
 1. This ground failed because the opponent failed to establish that the applicant had knowledge that the mark was clearly descriptive or non-distinctive. 
 
 
 
 2. This ground succeeded because the applicant failed to file evidence before the board which positively established its claim date of first use. 
 
 
 
 3. This ground was not dealt with as it was unnecessary to do so given the other findings. 
 
 
 
 4. This ground succeeded because the words "Community Credit Union" were inherently non-distinctive as they would be interpreted as referring to the services of a credit union that is located locally, services a certain segment of the population, and takes into account community interests. Furthermore no evidence was presented to show that the mark had acquired distinctiveness throughout Canada. 
 
 
 
 5. This ground failed because the opponent, Savings, failed to meet its initial burden to show non-abandonment. Savings had put forward no evidence to show that it had not abandoned the mark as of the date of the advertisement of the application June 7, 2000. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  As a result of these findings, the Registrar refused registration of the mark pursuant to subsection 38(8) of the  
 Act 
 . The applicant filed two applications to appeal the Registrar's decision which were consolidated and the two respondents were joined in the present proceedings. 
 
 
 
 ISSUES 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The following issues were identified: 
 
 
 
 1. What is the appropriate standard of review? 
 
 
 
 2. Did the registrar err in fact and law in holding that the applicant had not positively established the claimed date of first use? 
 
 
 
 3. Did the registrar err in not considering the section 12(1)(b) ground of opposition? 
 
 
 
 i. In the event that the registrar erred, is the mark clearly descriptive of the character or quality of the services in association with which it is used? 
 
 
 
 4. Did the registrar err in fact and law in holding that the mark was inherently non-distinctive within the meaning of section 2 of the  
 Act 
 ? 
 
 
 
 RELEVANT LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  Sections 2, 12(1), 30, 38(2), and 56(1) of the  
 Act 
  are as follows: 
 
 
 
 "2. In this Act, 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 'distinctive', in relation to a trade-mark, means a trade-mark that actually distinguishes the wares or services in association with which it is used by its owner from the wares or services of others or is adapted so to distinguish them; 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 'trade-mark' means 
 
 
 
 (a) a mark that is used by a person for the purpose of distinguishing or so as to distinguish wares or services manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by him from those manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by others, 
 
 
 
 (b) a certification mark, 
 
 
 
 (c) a distinguishing guise, or 
 
 
 
 (d) a proposed trade-mark; 
 
 
 
 "12(1) Subject to section 13, a trade-mark is registrable if it is not 
 
 
 
 (a) a word that is primarily merely the name or the surname of an individual who is living or has died within the preceding thirty years; 
 
 
 
 (b) whether depicted, written or sounded, either clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive in the English or French language of the character or quality of the wares or services in association with which it is used or proposed to be used or of the conditions of or the persons employed in their production or of their place of origin; 
 
 
 
 (c) the name in any language of any of the wares or services in connection with which it is used or proposed to be used; 
 
 
 
 (d) confusing with a registered trade-mark; 
 
 
 
 (e) a mark of which the adoption is prohibited by section 9 or 10; 
 
 
 
 (f) a denomination the adoption of which is prohibited by section 10.1; 
 
 
 
 (g) in whole or in part a protected geographical indication, where the trade-mark is to be registered in association with a wine not originating in a territory indicated by the geographical indication; and 
 
 
 
 (h) in whole or in part a protected geographical indication, where the trade-mark is to be registered in association with a spirit not originating in a territory indicated by the geographical indication. 
 
 
 
 "30. An applicant for the registration of a trade-mark shall file with the Registrar an application containing 
 
 
 
 (a) a statement in ordinary commercial terms of the specific wares of services in association with which the mark has been or is proposed to be used; 
 
 
 
 (b) in the case of a trade-mark that has been used in Canada, the date from which the applicant or his named predecessors in title, if any, have so used the trade-mark in association with each of the general classes of wares or services described in the application; 
 
 
 
 (c) in the case of a trade-mark that has not been used in Canada but is made known in Canada, the name of a country of the Union in which it has been used by the applicant or his named predecessors in title, if any, and the date from and the manner in which the applicant or named predecessors in title have made it known in Canada in association with each of the general classes of wares or services described in the application; 
 
 
 
 (d) in the case of a trade-mark that is the subject in or for another country of the Union of a registration or an application for registration by the applicant or the applicant's named predecessor in title on which the applicant bases the applicant's right to registration, particulars of the application or registration and, if the trade-mark has neither been used in Canada nor made known in Canada, the name of a country in which the trade-mark has been used by the applicant or the applicant's named predecessor in title, if any, in association with each of the general classes of wares or services described in the application; 
 
 
 
 (e) in the case of a proposed trade-mark, a statement that the applicant, by itself or through a licensee, or by itself and through a licensee, intends to use the trade-mark in Canada; 
 
 
 
 (f) in the case of a certification mark, particulars of the defined standard that the use of the mark is intended to indicate and a statement that the applicant is not engaged in the manufacture, sale, leasing or hiring of wares or the performance of services such as those in association with which the certification mark is used; 
 
 
 
 (g) the address of the applicant's principal office or place of business in Canada, if any, and if the applicant has no office or place of business in Canada, the address of his principal office or place of business abroad and the name and address in Canada of a person or firm to whom any notice in respect of the application or registration may be sent, and on whom service of any proceedings in respect of the application or registration may be given or served with the same effect as if they had been given to or served on the applicant or registrant himself; 
 
 
 
 (h) unless the application is for the registration only of a word or words not depicted in a special form, a drawing of the trade-mark and such number of accurate representations of the trade-mark as may be prescribed; and 
 
 
 
 (i) a statement that the applicant is satisfied that he is entitled to use the trade-mark in Canada in association with the wares or services described in the application. 
 
 
 
 "38. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(2) A statement of opposition may be based on any of the following grounds: 
 
 
 
 (a) that the application does not conform to the requirements of section 30; 
 
 
 
 (b) that the trade-mark is not registrable; 
 
 
 
 (c) that the applicant is not the person entitled to registration of the trade-mark; or 
 
 
 
 (d) that the trade-mark is not distinctive. 
 
 
 
 "56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the Court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months." 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "2. Les définitions qui suivent s'appliquent à la présente loi. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 'distinctive' Relativement à une marque de commerce, celle qui distingue véritablement les marchandises ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée par son propriétaire, des marchandises ou services d'autres propriétaires, ou qui est adaptée à les distinguer ainsi. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 'marque de commerce' Selon le cas: 
 
 
 
 a) marque employée par une personne pour distinguer, ou de façon à distinguer, les marchandises fabriquées, vendues, données à bail ou louées ou les services loués ou exécutés, par elle, des marchandises fabriquées, vendues, données à bail ou louées ou des services loués ou exécutés, par d'autres; 
 
 
 
 b) marque de certification; 
 
 
 
 c) signe distinctif; 
 
 
 
 d) marque de commerce projetée. 
 
 
 
 "12(1) Sous réserve de l'article 13, une marque de commerce est enregistrable sauf dans l'un ou l'autre des cas suivants: 
 
 
 
 a) elle est constituée d'un mot n'étant principalement que le nom ou le nom de famille d'un particulier vivant ou qui est décédé dans les trente années précédentes; 
 
 
 
 b) qu'elle soit sous forme graphique, écrite ou sonore, elle donne une description claire ou donne une description fausse et trompeuse, en langue française ou anglaise, de la nature ou de la qualité des marchandises ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée, ou à l'égard desquels on projette de l'employer, ou des conditions de leur production, ou des personnes qui les produisent, ou du lieu d'origine de ces marchandises ou services; 
 
 
 
 c) elle est constituée du nom, dans une langue, de l'une des marchandises ou de l'un des services à l'égard desquels elle est employée, ou à l'égard desquels on projette de l'employer; 
 
 
 
 d) elle crée de la confusion avec une marque de commerce déposée; 
 
 
 
 e) elle est une marque dont l'article 9 ou 10 interdit l'adoption; 
 
 
 
 f) elle est une dénomination dont l'article 10.1 interdit l'adoption; 
 
 
 
 g) elle est constituée, en tout ou en partie, d'une indication géographique protégée et elle doit être enregistrée en liaison avec un vin dont le lieu d'origine ne se trouve pas sur le territoire visé par l'indication; 
 
 
 
 h) elle est constituée, en tout ou en partie, d'une indication géographique protégée et elle doit être enregistrée en liaison avec un spiritueux dont le lieu d'origine ne se trouve pas sur le territoire visé par l'indication. 
 
 
 
 "30. Quiconque sollicite l'enregistrement d'une marque de commerce produit au bureau du registraire une demande renfermant: 
 
 
 
 a) un état, dressé dans les termes ordinaires du commerce, des marchandises ou services spécifiques en liaison avec lesquels la marque a été employée ou sera employée; 
 
 
 
 b) dans le cas d'une marque de commerce qui a été employée au Canada, la date à compter de laquelle le requérant ou ses prédécesseurs en titre désignés, le cas échéant, ont ainsi employé la marque de commerce en liaison avec chacune des catégories générales de marchandises ou services décrites dans la demande; 
 
 
 
 c) dans le cas d'une marque de commerce qui n'a pas été employée au Canada mais qui est révélée au Canada, le nom d'un pays de l'Union dans lequel elle a été employée par le requérant ou ses prédécesseurs en titre désignés, le cas échéant, et la date à compter de laquelle le requérant ou ses prédécesseurs l'ont fait connaître au Canada en liaison avec chacune des catégories générales de marchandises ou services décrites dans la demande, ainsi que la manière don't ils l'ont révélée; 
 
 
 
 d) dans le cas d'une marque de commerce qui est, dans un autre pays de l'Union, ou pour un autre pays de l'Union, l'objet, de la part du requérant ou de son prédécesseur en titre désigné, d'un enregistrement ou d'une demande d'enregistrement sur quoi le requérant fonde son droit à l'enregistrement, les détails de cette demande ou de cet enregistrement et, si la marque n'a été ni employée ni révélée au Canada, le nom d'un pays où le requérant ou son prédécesseur en titre désigné, le cas échéant, l'a employée en liaison avec chacune des catégories générales de marchandises ou services décrites dans la demande; 
 
 
 
 e) dans le cas d'une marque de commerce projetée, une déclaration portant que le requérant a l'intention de l'employer, au Canada, lui-même ou par l'entremise d'un licencié, ou lui-même et par l'entremise d'un licencié; 
 
 
 
 f) dans le cas d'une marque de certification, les détails de la norme définie que l'emploi de la marque est destiné à indiquer et une déclaration portant que le requérant ne pratique pas la fabrication, la vente, la location à bail ou le louage de marchandises ou ne se livre pas à l'exécution de services, tels que ceux pour lesquels la marque de certification est employée; 
 
 
 
 g) l'adresse du principal bureau ou siège d'affaires du requérant, au Canada, le cas échéant, et si le requérant n'a ni bureau ni siège d'affaires au Canada, l'adresse de son principal bureau ou siège d'affaires à l'étranger et les nom et adresse, au Canada, d'une personne ou firme à qui tout avis concernant la demande ou l'enregistrement peut être envoyé et à qui toute procédure à l'égard de la demande ou de l'enregistrement peut être signifiée avec le même effet que si elle avait été signifiée au requérant ou à l'inscrivant lui-même; 
 
 
 
 h) sauf si la demande ne vise que l'enregistrement d'un mot ou de mots non décrits en une forme spéciale, un dessin de la marque de commerce, ainsi que le nombre, qui peut être prescrit, de représentations exactes de cette marque; 
 
 
 
 i) une déclaration portant que le requérant est convaincu qu'il a droit d'employer la marque de commerce au Canada en liaison avec les marchandises ou services décrits dans la demande. 
 
 
 
 "38. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "(2) Cette opposition peut être fondée sur l'un des motifs suivants: 
 
 
 
 a) la demande ne satisfait pas aux exigences de l'article 30; 
 
 
 
 b) la marque de commerce n'est pas enregistrable; 
 
 
 
 c) le requérant n'est pas la personne ayant droit à l'enregistrement; 
 
 
 
 d) la marque de commerce n'est pas distinctive. 
 
 
 
 "56(1) Appel de toute décision rendue par le registraire, sous le régime de la présente loi, peut être interjeté à la Cour fédérale dans les deux mois qui suivent la date où le registraire a expédié l'avis de la décision ou dans tel délai supplémentaire accordé par le tribunal, soit avant, soit après l'expiration des deux mois." 
 
 
 
 ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 1.  
 Standard of review 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Where evidence has been filed on appeal that would have materially affected the Registrar's findings of fact or law, or the exercise of discretion, the standard should be one of correctness. In such cases, the Court is entitled to substitute its opinion for that of the Registrar:  
 Telus Corp. et al. v. Orange Personal Communications Services Ltd. 
  (2005), 273 F.T.R. 228; 39 C.P.R.(4th) 389; 2005 FC 590, at para. 24. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  The quality of the new evidence must be considered. If it adds nothing of significance and is merely repetitive of existing evidence without enhancing its cogency, the question will be whether the registrar was clearly wrong. As such, the presence of the evidence should not affect the standard of review applied by the Court on the appeal:  
 Garbo Group Inc. et al. v. Brown (Harriet) & Co. et al. 
 , [1999] F.C.J. No. 1763; 176 F.T.R. 80; 3 C.P.R.(4th) 224; 3 C.P.R. (4th) 224 (T.D.), at paras. 35-37. 
 
 
 
 [13] 
  The expertise of the registrar has been recognized to require some deference. In  
 Molson Breweries, A Partnership v. Labatt (John) Ltd. et al. 
 , [2000] 3 F.C. 145; 252 N.R. 91; 5 C.P.R.(4th) 180 (F.C.A.) at para. 29, 5 C.P.R. (4th) 180 ( 
 Molson Breweries 
  cited to F.C.), the Federal Court of Appeal concluded that the applicable standard of review on appeal from the registrar was reasonableness. 
 
 
 
 [14] 
  The parties are generally in agreement that with the exception of the issue regarding the claimed date of first use, the registrar's decision should be assessed on a reasonableness standard. The applicant submits that it has adduced new evidence that would have materially affected the registrar's findings, which both respondents dispute. That is the only question which requires review on the correctness standard, should the applicant be successful in demonstrating the evidence is new. With respect to the other issues, the court may only intervene if there is no line of analysis within the reasons that could reasonably lead the board from the evidence before it to the conclusion at which it arrived:  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED Ryan v. Law Society of New Brunswick 
 , [2003] 1 S.C.R. 247; 302 N.R. 1; 257 N.B.R.(2d) 207; 674 A.P.R. 207; 2003 SCC 20, at para. 55. 
 
 
 
 2.  
 Did the Registrar err in holding that the applicant had not established the claimed date of first use? 
 
 
 
 [15] 
  Section 30 (b) of the  
 Act 
  provides that an applicant for registration of a trademark based on use shall file with the registrar an application containing the date from which the applicant or his named predecessors in title, if any, have so used the trademark in association with each of the general classes of wares or services described in the application. What constitutes use is a question of law. An affiant must establish facts from which a conclusion of use can follow. Ambiguities are to be resolved against the applicant:  
 Conde Nast Publications Inc. v. Union des Editions Modernes 
  (1979), 46 C.P.R.(2d) 183 (F.C.T.D.) 
 
 
 
 [16] 
  Before the Registrar, the applicant had claimed use of the mark in Canada "as early as November, 1986". In support, the applicant filed the affidavit of Mr. Murray Haubrich, Executive Vice-President, with exhibits including the applicant's annual report for 1986. Mr. Haubrich was cross-examined on his affidavit and conceded that the report was not printed and distributed until January or February of 1987. He was unable to provide the dates of publication of other material. As a result, the board found that the opponents had satisfied their evidentiary burden, and because the applicant had not filed evidence positively establishing its claimed date of first use, the applicant had not satisfied its legal burden. 
 
 
 
 [17] 
  The new evidence submitted by the applicant in these proceedings consists of a fresh affidavit from Mr. Haubrich and an affidavit from another officer of the company, Jerry Baytalan, attaching as exhibits: advertisements from the Medicine Hat News dated October 4, 1986 and October 11, 1986; business cards used in the period of time after the date of the claim to first use; advertisements from the Medicine Hat News dated February 12, 1987, February 21, 1987, February 1, 1988, February 11, 1988, February 10, 1990, and February 11, 1990; a document entitled "Suggested Goals for 1987 for Murray H. Haubrich"; an interest rate sheet from October 29, 1993; "Minutes of the Board of Directors Meeting in July 31, 1986"; and the Medicine Hat Credit Union Ltd. 1986-1987 "Strategic Business Plan". 
 
 
 
 [18] 
  Save for the Medicine Hat News advertisements dated October, 1986, all of these exhibits are either undated or date from after the claimed date of first use. They do not assist the applicant with respect to the standard of review or in resolving the section 30 (b) issue in its favour. 
 
 
 
 [19] 
  Submissions at the hearing thus focused on the October advertisements. Both demonstrate an effort to use the words "Community Credit Union" as a means of self identification. However neither displays the mark as it was framed in the mark application, i.e., they do not show the use of Community Credit Union as a trademark. In the October 4, 1986 advertisement, the following words appear, all in uniform font: "the Community Credit Union of Medicine Hat ..." In the October 11, 1986 advertisement, these words appear, again in uniform font size: "and of course, everyone is eligible to do their banking at the Community Credit Union...share the advantage of doing your banking at a Community Credit Union". 
 
 
 
 [20] 
  The October 11, 1986 advertisement is the most helpful to the applicant as it refers to Community Credit Union without the qualifier, "of Medicine Hat". In neither advertisement, however, is the format and wording used consistent with the mark in contrast to the post- "claimed date of use" exhibits. 
 
 
 
 [21] 
  While the applicant has provided some evidence that the words "Community Credit Union" were used in advertisements before the claimed date of first use, the question is whether this evidence would have materially affected the Registrar's findings. The mere existence of additional evidence is not enough to displace the deference owed to the Registrar. 
 
 
 
 [22] 
  As noted by Justice Carolyn Layden- Stevenson in  
 Vivat Holdings Ltd. v. Levi Strauss & Co. 
 , [2005] F.C.J. No. 893; 276 F.T.R. 40; 2005 FC 707, at paragraph 27: 
 
 
 
 "To affect the standard of review, the new evidence must be sufficiently substantial and significant. If the additional evidence does not go beyond what was in substance already before the board and adds nothing of probative significance, but merely supplements or is merely repetitive of existing evidence, then a less deferential standard is not warranted. The test is one of quality, not quantity." (Citations excluded) 
 
 
 
 [23] 
  In my view, the new evidence merely supplements the evidence that was before the board that the applicant was in the process of making the transition from one identity to another in the fall of 1986, one that would minimize its connection to the City of Medicine Hat and promote its business in other communities as local in nature. It had not clearly established its use of the new "brand" by November 1986. I am not satisfied that had the applicant submitted this evidence at the opposition hearing it would have materially affected the board's findings thus requiring a correctness standard of review and substitution of the Court's opinion for that of the Registrar. 
 
 
 
 Did the registrar err in not considering the s. 12(1)(b) ("clearly descriptive") ground of opposition? 
 
 
 
 [24] 
  The applicant submits that the registrar erred in fact and in law in failing to determine that the mark was not "clearly descriptive of a character or quality of the ... services," as this would have been instrumental to any determination of non-distinctiveness, under the expansive definition of "distinctive" used by the Registrar. The applicant submits that the Registrar went beyond the  
 Act's 
  definition of distinctive to include very generic marks as non-distinctive marks. 
 
 
 
 [25] 
  The respondents submit that having found the mark non-distinctive, the registrar was correct in not considering further grounds of opposition as it would have made no difference to the applicant. Had it been considered by the board, the ground would have succeeded according to the respondents. 
 
 
 
 [26] 
  In 
  Canadian Council of Professional Engineers v. APA - The Engineered Wood Association 
 , [2000] F.C.J. No.1027; 184 F.T.R. 55 (T.D.), at para. 49, Justice Jack O'Keefe held that the registrar erred in holding that a ground of opposition on the basis of non-distinctiveness was merely repetitive of the argument that the trademarks were clearly descriptive. Subsection 38(2) clearly indicates that the two grounds of opposition are not the same. A statement of opposition may be based on the grounds, among others, that the trademark is not registrable or that it is not distinctive. Under paragraph 12(1)(b), a trademark is registrable if it is not either clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of the character or quality of the wares or services in association with which it is used. Justice O'Keefe concluded that the question of the distinctiveness of the proposed marks ought to have been considered independently. A finding of descriptiveness is not instrumental to a finding of non-distinctiveness. The two are separate grounds of opposition and need not be argued together. 
 
 
 
 [27] 
  In the decision under review, the board member followed and applied Justice O'Keefe's reasoning that the distinctiveness of the proposed mark must be considered independently. She then concluded that it was not necessary to deal with the ground as the application was refused on to other grounds. In my view it was not unreasonable of the board member to have done so. 
 
 
 
 [28] 
  In the event that I am wrong in this regard and the Registrar erred in not considering the ground, I am satisfied that the mark is clearly descriptive of the character of the services to be provided in association with its use. 
 
 
 
 [29] 
  The rationale underlying the prohibition against descriptive marks is that no trader can monopolize a common property which anyone in the trade has the right to use:  
 Partlo v. Todd 
  (1888), 17 S.C.R. 196 at 223. In assessing the descriptiveness off the mark, it is the immediate impression of the mark as a whole that must be analyzed, not its component parts. The impression created is to be evaluated from the point of view of the ordinary everyday purchaser or user of the wares or services:  
 Mitel Corp. v. Registrar of Trademarks 
  (1984), 79 C.P.R.(2d) 202 (F.C.T.D.) at 208. 
 
 
 
 [30] 
  One cannot obtain an exclusive proprietary right in an ordinary word that aptly describes the services of others. I agree with the respondents that registration of the mark COMMUNITY CREDIT UNION would remove the word "community" from the vocabulary available to others providing the services of a credit union. 
 
 
 
 Did the registrar err in fact and law in holding that the mark was inherently non-distinctive within the meaning of section 2 of the Act? 
 
 
 
 [31] 
  The applicant has raised several arguments in respect of this issue. Firstly, that the registrar erred in finding that the mark was inherently non-distinctive due to its being "very generic". Secondly, that the registrar erred in finding that because the mark does not contain a further independently distinctive word (like the other marks in evidence) it does not actually distinguish. Thirdly, that given the vague and ubiquitous nature of the word "community" and given that a provider of any kind of service would have some connection to the community in which they are located, the word cannot suffer from being inherently non-distinctive. 
 
 
 
 [32] 
  The affidavit evidence submitted by the respondents demonstrates that the words "Community Credit Union" were common to the credit union trade as of the material date of December 2000 when the statement of opposition was filed and have been used by numerous credit unions across the country for many years. A corporate records search demonstrated that the words had been used by at least 58 credit unions in Canada since 1980. What enables consumers to separate one of these credit unions from another are the parts of their names other than "Community Credit Union" such as Greater Vancouver, Cornwall, North York, or indeed, Medicine Hat. The words "Community Credit Union" cannot identify one from the other because they are, and were at the material date, common to the credit union trade. 
 
 
 
 [33] 
  The registrar correctly noted that there are two types of distinctiveness: inherent distinctiveness and acquired distinctiveness. As stated in  
 Hughes on Trademarks 
 , 2nd Ed. (Markham: LexisNexis Canada Inc., 2005) at 648. 
 
 
 
 "A mark is distinctive when nothing about it refers the customers to a multitude of sources. Consequently when a mark is a unique or invented name, such that it could only refer to one thing, it is possible to conclude that it is inherently distinctive." 
 
 
 
 [34] 
  The Registrar concluded that the mark was inherently non-distinctive because there were many credit unions in Canada that used "Community Credit Union" in their trade names or trademarks. The Registrar then considered whether the mark had acquired distinctiveness by use throughout Canada. The board member concluded that the evidence showed only that the mark may have acquired distinctiveness in some parts of Alberta but there was no evidence that it had been used or made known across Canada. 
 
 
 
 [35] 
  In reaching this conclusion, the board member relied on the decision of the Trademarks Opposition Board in  
 Muffin Houses Inc. v. The Muffin House Bakery Ltd. 
  (1985), 4 C.P.R.(3d) 272 (T.M. Opp. Bd.). The board member was aware that the Federal Court of Appeal has stated that exclusive use is not mandatory for a finding of distinctiveness:  
 Molson Breweries 
  above at para. 69. However that decision also stands for the proposition that the use of the same mark by others in association with similar wares (or services) is relevant in determining whether a mark is in fact distinctive. 
 
 
 
 [36] 
  A mark may become distinctive in a particular geographical area. However, there was considerable evidence before the Registrar and in these proceedings that the mark was commonly used within the trade in every region. Distinctiveness will depend upon all of the circumstances. In this case, the circumstances clearly pointed to an absence of distinctiveness and I cannot find that the Registrar erred in that finding. 
 
 
 
 [37] 
  In the result, I am satisfied that the line of reasoning supporting the Registrar's decision demonstrates that it is not clearly wrong or unreasonable. Had I determined that less deference was warranted, I would have arrived at the conclusion that the decision is correct. The appeal will, therefore, be dismissed. 
 
 
 
 [38] 
  The respondent Savings has requested costs if successful, Central has not. The Court will exercise its discretion to order that each party bear its own costs. 
 
 
 
 [39] 
  IT IS HEREBY ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the appeal is dismissed. The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
 
 
 Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Angela E. McKay/vnh 
 
 
 
 [End of document] 
 
 
 




