[3]
The Tribunal concluded:
"Thus, I have concluded that the employer did not make every reasonable effort to accommodate the grievor. In these circumstances, overtime cost did not justify denying leave under the guise of operational requirements. The 30-day requirement [the advance notice of requests for leave that the employer sought to require] does not form part of the collective agreement and thus cannot justify the employer's refusal either. Therefore, the employer violated the collective agreement when it refused the requested vacation leave for April 8, 1995. Obviously, it is too late to order the employer to comply with the request of leave for April 8, 1995. I therefore order the employer to grant one day of vacation leave to the grievor, at a time he requests, and on reasonable notice to the employer within the next six months. This day of leave is not to be deducted from the grievor's accumulated vacation leave credits.
"I am mindful of the fact that by making this order the grievor is now entitled to a day's vacation leave in addition to his allotment under the terms of the collective agreement. I am also mindful of the fact that there was no evidence before me that denial of leave for April 8, 1995 caused the grievor financial loss or severe hardship. Nonetheless, the grievor was deprived from attending a social function in which he was to receive an award of recognition. Apart from the
deception
that one would expect any employee to have experienced, there is the fact that the grievor is a shift worker. Thus, social functions are generally more difficult to attend assiduously and are therefore more likely to be treasured. The grievor has suffered a loss.
"I am also concerned by the number of cases dealt with by members of this Board where the wishes of employees are set aside for considerations consistently found to be improper in assessing operational requirements. Some of those cases were cited to me in this hearing. The employer has struck a bargain and must abide by it. In these circumstances, I feel a lesser order than the one I am making would not sufficiently address the concerns stated above, and I note that my remedial authority is broad indeed:
Heustis v. N.B. Electric Power Commission
, [1972] 2 S.C.R. 768." (Counsel for the respondent argued that the underlined word "deception" should be considered as a typographical error and that the word "disappointment" should be substituted as it makes more sense in the context. There might well be merit in counsel's argument. I agree that "disappointment" fits more appropriately in the context. Further, if both official languages were in play in the preparation of the Tribunal's reasons, it is worthy of note that the french word "déception" is equated with "disappointment, let-down" in the french to english portion of the
Harper Collins Robert French Dictionary
, Standard Edition, Second edition. However, in the absence of any evidence on the issue, I am not prepared to read in the substitution urged by counsel.)