[22]
With respect to the alleged misdescription of the copyright allegedly infringed, the respondents point out that while the injunctions enjoined the copying of the "Enhanced Apple IIe Program", they described this program as "the plaintiff's copyrighted works which are the subject-matter of Canadian copyright registrations ... 444,382". It is common ground that the copyright in question is number 344,382. In other words a "4" was wrongly substituted for a "3" at the beginning of the relevant registration number so that on its face the injunction appears to apply to protect a copyright which has nothing to do with the matter in hand. While the number was properly stated in paragraph 33 of the statement of claim, it was erroneously stated at least twice in the prayer for relief. That error was unfortunately carried forward in the formal order prepared for the signature of Walsh, J., and the injunction in this form was continued by Giles, A.S.P. This error remains unexplained and appears to me to be inexplicable. The question remains as to whether it should be fatal to the applicant's allegation of copyright infringement. I respectfully accept that the correct approach in these matters was indicated by the Supreme Court of Canada in Baxter Laboratories of Canada Ltd., Travenol Laboratories Inc. and Baxter Travenol Laboratories Inc. v. Cutter (Canada) Ltd. (1983), 50 N.R. 1; 75 C.P.R.(2d) 1 (S.C.C.), at 3, where, in reference to an erroneous description of the plaintiff in the reasons for judgment it said that this was "a clerical mistake only, which could not have misled Cutter" (Cutter being the defendant). I am satisfied that the respondents were not misled by this typographical error in the injunction and knew full well which program of the applicant it was prohibited from infringing. To put the respondents' case at its highest, they might theoretically have found ambiguity in the reference in the injunction to the "Enhanced Apple IIe Program" as being the subject-matter of copyright registration 444,382. That their bewilderment could have lasted very long, considering that they had already unsuccessfully contested a motion in which they could have had no doubt as to which copyright was in issue, is barely credible. Further, it was open to them to seek clarification in the reasons given by Walsh, J., in which at page 14 he refers to the Apple Enhanced Program as being subject to copyright registration 344,382. I am satisfied that the respondents could have had no reasonable doubt as to the program whose infringement was enjoined by the order of Walsh, J. They cannot be excused from complying with an order on such a technicality, deplorable though the error might be.