 [26] 
  In  
 Director of Investigation and Research, Competition Act v. Southam Inc. et al. 
 , [1997] 1 S.C.R. 748; 209 N.R. 20; 144 D.L.R.(4th) 1, the Court addressed the meaning of reasonableness simpliciter and said at p. 778: 
 
 
 
 "The standard of reasonableness simpliciter is also closely akin to the standard that this Court has said should be applied in reviewing findings of fact by trial judges. In  
 Stein v. "Kathy K" (The Ship) 
 , [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, at p. 806, Ritchie, J., described the standard in the following terms: 
 
 
 
 '... the accepted approach of a court of appeal is to test the findings [if fact] made at trial on the basis of whether or not they were clearly wrong rather than whether they accorded with that court's view of the balance of probability.' (emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 "Even as a matter of semantics, the closeness of the "clearly wrong" test to the standard of reasonableness simpliciter is obvious. It is true that many things are wrong that are not unreasonable; but when "clearly" is added to "wrong", the meaning is brought much nearer to that of "unreasonable". Consequently, the clearly wrong test represents a striking out from the correctness test in the direction of deference. But the clearly wrong test does not go so far as the standard of patent unreasonableness. For if many things are wrong that are not unreasonable, then many things are clearly wrong that are not patently unreasonable (on the assumption that "clearly" and "patently" are close synonyms). It follows, then, that the clearly wrong test, like the standard of reasonableness simpliciter, falls on the continuum between correctness and the standard of patent unreasonableness. Because the clearly wrong test is familiar to Canadian judges, it may serve as a guide to them in applying the standard of reasonableness simpliciter. 
 
 
 
 "Putting all of the foregoing considerations into the balance and taking my cue from this Court's decisions on the subject, including particularly relatively recent decisions, I am of the view that decisions of the Tribunal should be subject to review on a reasonableness standard. That this standard is appropriate and sensible becomes clear when one considers the complexity of economic life being regulated. It bears noting, however, that the standard I have chosen permits recourse to the courts for judicial intervention in cases in which the Tribunal has been shown to have acted unreasonably. 
 
 
 
 "In the final result, the standard of reasonableness simply instructs reviewing courts to accord considerable weight to the views of tribunals about matters with respect to which they have significant expertise. While a policy of deference to expertise may take the form of a particular standard of review, at bottom the issue is the weight that should be accorded to expert opinions. In other words, deference in terms of a "standard of reasonableness" and deference in terms of "weight" are two sides of the same coin. In this respect, I agree with Kerans, supra, at p. 17, who has described deference to expertise in the following way: 
 
 
 
 'Experts, in our society, are called that precisely because they can arrive at well-informed and rational conclusions. If that is so, they should be able to explain, to a fair-minded but less well-informed observer, the reasons for their conclusions. If they cannot, they are not very expert. If something is worth knowing and relying upon, it is worth telling. Expertise commands deference only when the expert is coherent. Expertise loses a right to deference when it is not defensible. That said, it seems obvious that [appellate courts] manifestly must give great weight to cogent views thus articulated.'" Ibid. at pp. 778-780