[2]
The applicant applied in Hong Kong for an immigrant visa to Canada in the "investor category". At the heart of that category is the definition 'investor' in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
[see footnote 1]. That definition reads as follows:
"'investor' means an immigrant who
(a) has successfully operated, controlled or directed a business,
(b) has made a minimum investment since the date of the investor's application for an immigrant visa as an investor, and
(c) has a net worth, accumulated by the immigrant's own endeavours,
(i) where the immigrant makes an investment referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) or (ii) (b)(i), (c)(i) or (ii), (d)(i) or (ii) or (e)(i) or (ii) of the definition 'minimum investment', of at least $500,000, or
(ii) where the immigrant makes an investment referred to in subparagraph (a)(iii), (b)(ii), (c)(iii), (d)(iii) or (e)(iii) of the definition 'minimum investment', of at least $700,000;"
The elements of the definition are conjunctive. Thus, to qualify in the investor category, the applicant was required to meet all three elements of the definition "investor". On the evidence that was before him in this matter, the visa officer determined that the applicant did not meet the requirements for immigration to Canada in the investor category by reason of the fact that he met neither of the first and third elements of the definition "investor". In his decision, the visa officer wrote:
"I have determined that you do not meet the definition of investor for the following reasons.
"Your title is assistant factory manager. You do not own shares in the company you work for. Your salary is only $20,000 HK a month. You report to the factory manager who reports to the director and general manager who reports to the president. The factory is owned by the president and general manager. You indicated that you supervised seven department heads directly and that you sit on the management committee with the president, general manager, factory manager, executive manager, engineering manager and finance manager.
"You have not successfully operated, controlled or directed a business. You are simply a salaried employee ($20,000 HK a month). There are three people more senior than you. Your assessable personal net worth is only $282,000 [Can]. The bank accounts presented were in your wife's name and the property was in both names. Though you assisted in the managing of the factory, real decision making took place in Hong Kong. It is not credible that a salaried employee with no shares, no capital investment, would have final say on any matter of significance. Were you to have such influence, your salary would be higher, you would have shares and enjoy the profits of the company's success."