[8]
I turn then to the issue of calculation of the applicant's "... net worth, accumulated by [his] own endeavours". As indicated in the portions from the visa officer's rejection letter quoted above, the visa officer disregarded the value of assets held in the applicant's spouse's name and only took into account fifty percent of the value of assets held in joint tenancy by the applicant and his spouse. Counsel for the applicant urged that the full value of family assets, or at least of assets held in joint tenancy between the applicant and his spouse, should have been taken into account in computing the applicant's net worth, accumulated by his own endeavours. In
Ho v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
[see footnote 4], Mr. Justice Heald, dealing with calculation of the net worth of an investor category applicant, wrote:
"My impression from the totality of the evidence herein is that the applicant had much difficulty in separating her financial resources from those of her husband ... and in producing documentation in support of her claim."
I am satisfied on the evidence that was before the visa officer in this matter, that the same could be said in respect of this applicant. The evidence was simply insufficient to justify treating all of the assets of the applicant and his spouse, or even the full value of their joint assets, as assets accumulated by the applicant's own endeavours that should be included in calculation of his own net worth as opposed to the net worth of he and his spouse. I find nothing on the face of the definition "investor" quoted above that would justify inclusion in the net worth of this applicant, the value of his spouse's assets and of her share of assets held jointly by them. If Parliament or the Governor-in-Council had intended that the value of assets of spouses be aggregated in the calculation of net worth of an investor class applicant, that could have been made clear. I am not prepared, as counsel for the applicant urged me to do, to infer from the fact that, if this applicant had qualified in the investor category, his spouse would have been entitled to accompany him to Canada as his dependant, that their assets should be aggregated. Thus, I conclude that the visa officer made no reviewable error in calculation of the net worth, accumulated by his own endeavours, of the applicant.