 [23] 
  Mr. Justice McKeown also applied  
 Brooks 
 , supra, in the context of a citizenship revocation case in  
 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Baumgartner 
  (2001), 211 F.T.R. 197 (T.D.). Mr. Justice McKeown wrote as follows at paragraphs 138 through 140: 
 
 
 
 "138. In  
 M.M.I. v. Brooks 
 , [1974] S.C.R. 850, Laskin, J., writing for the court, held that  
 untruths or misleading answers that in effect foreclose an avenue of inquiry may be material misrepresentations 
 , even when the further inquiry might not have discovered any independent ground of deportation.  
 Brooks 
 , supra, involved allegedly false answers given by the applicant on his application for admission into Canada. At 865-73, Laskin, J., stated: 
 
 
 
 '... An answer may be both false and misleading but the statute does not demand this combination. It may be the one or the other and still fall within the prohibition. Again, since criminal punishment is not the object of the enforcement of immigration and deportation policies by means of special inquiries, I cannot be persuaded that intentional or wilful deception would be read in as a prerequisite ... 
 
 
 
 'Lest there be any doubt on the matter as a result of the Board's reasons, I would repudiate any contention or conclusion that materiality under s. 19(1)(e)(viii) requires that the untruth or the misleading information may fall short of this and yet have been an inducing factor in admission. Evidence, as was given in the present case, that certain incorrect answers would have had no influence in the admission of a person is, of course, relevant to materiality. But also relevant is whether the untruths or the misleading answers had the effect of foreclosing or averting further inquiries, even if those inquiries might not have turned up any independent ground of deportation.' 
 
 
 
 "139. The Minister brought to the court's attention various cases that followed the principle enunciated in  
 Brooks 
 , supra, including the decision in  
 Hilario v. M.M.I. 
 , [1978] 1 F.C. 697 (T.D.);  
 Khamsei v. M.E.I. 
 , [1981] 1 F.C. 222 (F.C.A.);  
 Juayong v. M.E.I. 
  (1988), 99 N.R. 78 (F.C.A.);  
 Okwe v. M.E.I. 
  (1991), 136 N.R. 261 (F.C.A.); and  
 Mohammed v. Canada (M.C.I.) 
 , [1997] F.C.J. No. 605 (Q.L.).  
 In not admitting that he was a concentration camp guard during the war, the applicant effectively prevented any questioning by the immigration officials (both the Immigration Officer and the Visa Control Officer) regarding the particulars of that service. Thus, it would have been impossible for the authorities to question him on what acts he had committed as a concentration camp guard, some of which may have rendered him inadmissible as an 'offender' or 'major offender' under the criteria established by the Security Panel at its May 15, 1952 meeting 
 . I note that the defendant submits that there was no duty of candour placed on Mr. Baumgartner at the time of his immigration interview, as per the decision of this court in  
 Secretary of State v. Luitjens 
  (1991), 46 F.T.R. 267. I agree with this submission, but find that it is irrelevant in the present case, as Mr. Baumgartner himself testified that he was indeed asked about his military involvement during his immigration interviews in March, 1953. 
 
 
 
 "140. The defendant submits at page 24, paragraph 50 of the defendant's written submissions that: 
 
 
 
 'It cannot be inferred that the mere entry of Mr. Baumgartner into Canada was a result of a fraud unless the court is satisfied that he would have necessarily been refused entry had his true situation been known which, in turn requires proof that the applicable rejection criteria, whatever that may have been, would have required the rejection of the defendant.' 
 
 
 
 "However, as I already stated,  
 it is not necessary to establish that Mr. Baumgartner would have been refused entry due to misrepresentation, but only that he withheld a material piece of information and thereby may have made it impossible for the Immigration Officers and the security officer to pursue an avenue of inquiry that may have revealed that Mr. Baumgartner was indeed inadmissible 
  according to the Security Panel's May, 1952 policy and the corresponding 'Reasons for Rejection' criteria. As the case law cited above demonstrates, and contrary to the submissions of the defendant,  
 the Minister is not required to show in her pleadings that specified misrepresentations resulted in the landing of Mr. Baumgartner. Mr. Baumgartner, in not disclosing that he served as a concentration camp guard, circumvented an inquiry regarding the specific acts that he may have committed and the nature of his service in that capacity. Such inquiry may have uncovered information that would have rendered Mr. Baumgartner inadmissible. 
  Thus,  
 when Mr. Baumgartner failed to disclose his role as a concentration camp guard when he was asked about his military service during his March, 1953 interviews with Canadian officials, he committed a material misrepresentation which lead to his becoming landed in Canada and, later, to his obtaining Canadian Citizenship 
 ." (Underlining added) 
 
