[9]
The appellant argues, however, that one must look at the opening words of s. 6(5) which direct the court or the Registrar to have regard "to all the surrounding circumstances" including those specifically listed. The appellant contends that there is compelling evidence of another circumstance, a lack of distinctiveness of the respondent's registered trademarks in relation to the trademarks and trade names of third parties, which should have led the Registrar or should lead the court to conclude that there is no likelihood of confusion between the appellant's proposed trademarks and the respondent's registered trademarks. The appellant sought to demonstrate through evidence submitted to the Chairman that the word "NUTRI" is in such common use in other trademarks, trade names and company names that it is in no way distinctive. Most of this evidence was held to be defective by the Chairman. New affidavits were filed before me to overcome those defects. Counsel for the appellant states, and this was not refuted by counsel for the respondent, that according to the evidence now on file as of the filing date of the applicant's applications, May 19, 1981, there were at least forty-seven trademark registrations and forty-three trade names using the word "NUTRI". As of the opposition date, December 17, 1981, there were at least a further three trade names. Since that time there have been eighteen further trademark registrations or applications therefor and sixty-six trade names adopted using this word. I am not satisfied that such a "surrounding circumstance" adds much to the appellant's case. It may well be, in fact, that this is more relevant to the question of "inherent distinctiveness", which the Chairman and I have both already found the respondent's trademarks to lack. Further, I reiterate that the trademarks of the respondent are in no way on trial here. Nor is the respondent suing the applicant for infringement of the former's registered trademarks. What the Chairman had to decide on behalf of the Registrar, and what I have to decide, is whether the appellant has demonstrated that there is no likelihood of confusion between its proposed trademarks and the proposed trademarks of the respondent referred to in its opposition. Having regard to the nature of the products and of these particular trademarks I do not think the appellant has met the onus on it at least with respect to possible confusion with NUTRI-MAX. The fact that there are many other trademarks, trade names and businesses which use the word "NUTRI" is only marginally relevant to the issues which must be decided in these proceedings. The appellant relied on the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Pepsi-Cola Company of Canada, Limited v. The Coca-Cola Company of Canada, Limited, [1940] S.C.R. 17. This was an action brought by the Coca-Cola Company for infringement, and the defendant Pepsi-Cola Company counterclaimed to have the plaintiff's trademark expunged. At page 33 the court held admissible, and took into account, the fact that there were some thirty other trademarks and trade names registered in Canada in which the word "Cola" was used. This evidence was held to be "admissible as some evidence of the general adoption of the word in names for different beverages or tonics ...". The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on appeal, [1942] 1 C.P.R. 293 at 299 approved the admission of this evidence "as showing that the word Cola ... had been adopted in Canada as an item in the naming of different beverages. The proper comparison must be made with that fact in mind. ..." It must be remembered that this was an action for infringement. The Supreme Court noted at page 32 of its judgment:
"The authorities are plain, we think, that the rules of comparison for testing an alleged infringement of a registered mark resemble those rules by which the question of similarity on an application for registration is tested but that it is necessary to establish a closer likeness in order to make out an actual infringement than would justify the refusal of an application to register. The burden on a plaintiff in an infringement action is to show reasonable probability of confusion, while an applicant for registration must establish, if challenged, the absence of all reasonable prospect of confusion."
This distinguishes the Pepsi-Cola case from the present applications for registration. It should also be noted that the question of whether the word "Cola" had been adopted in Canada as an item in the naming of different beverages was relevant to a finding in effect that "Cola" is a generic description for a certain kind of beverage so that the plaintiff, the Coca-Cola Company, had to demonstrate that the word "Coca" was infringed by the defendant's word "Pepsi". Such a finding is not possible, on the evidence, in the present case in connection with the word "NUTRI".