[10]
Returning to the defendants' seizure of the saltfish, it is clear that their fisheries protection officers were invoking and acting pursuant to s. 6(1) of the Coastal Fisheries Protection Act, above cited. It provides:
"6(1) Whenever a protection officer suspects on reasonable grounds that an offence against this Act has been committed, he may seize
(a) any fishing vessel by means of or in relation to which he reasonably believes the offence was committed;
(b) any goods aboard the fishing vessel, including fish, tackle, rigging, apparel, furniture, stores and cargo; or
(c) the fishing vessel, and any of the goods mentioned in paragraph (b)."
The following subsections are also of importance in the circumstances of this case:
"(3) Subject to this section, the fishing vessel and goods seized under subsection (1) shall be retained in the custody of the protection officer making the seizure or shall be delivered into the custody of such person as the Minister may direct.
"(4) Where fish or other perishable articles are seized under subsection (1), the protection officer or other person having the custody thereof may sell them, and the proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the Receiver General or shall be deposited in a chartered bank to the credit of the Receiver General.
. . . . .
"(6) Where a fishing vessel or goods have been seized under subsection (1) and proceedings in respect of the offence have been instituted, the court or judge may, with the consent of the protection officer who made the seizure, order
redelivery thereof to the accused upon security by bond
, with two sureties, in an amount and form satisfactory to the Minister, being given to Her Majesty.
(Emphasis not in statutory text.)
"(9) Where a fishing vessel or goods have been seized under subsection (1) and proceedings in respect of the offence have been instituted, but the fishing vessel or goods or any proceeds realized from a sale thereof under subsection (4) are not at the final conclusion of the proceedings ordered to be forfeited, they shall be returned or the proceeds shall be paid to the person from whom the fishing vessel or goods were taken, or
... (not applicable) ..."