[21]
The pertinent passages in the reasons written by Craig, J.A., in the Milton case are these:
"The judge premised his decision on the view that when the Crown seized goods under s. 58(1) and relied on s. 58(6) for forfeiture, such seizure was 'for the purpose of forfeiture'. Purporting to rely on the test for reasonable search and seizure enunciated by Dickson, J., in Hunter et al. v. Southam Inc. (1984), 14 C.C.C.(3d) 97; 11 D.L.R.(4th) 641; [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, the trial judge said that he 'must focus on the impact on the subject of the seizure and not on rationality of furthering some valid government objective'. The trial judge concluded, also, that the decision in Southam was 'not restricted to questions of invasion of privacy'. (C.C.C. p. 163)
. . . . .
"The fisheries officers seized the nets because they thought reasonably they had been used in connection with the commission of an offence against the Act or the Regulations. Forfeiture could result from the seizure, but not necessarily; accordingly, it is not correct to say that seizure was for the purpose of forfeiture. Whether there will be forfeiture of the applicant's interest will depend on the outcome of the application under ss. 59(2) and 5(b).
"I think that the trial judge erred, too, in stating that 'the test of reasonableness must focus on the impact on the subject of the seizure and not on rationality of furthering some valid government objective'. (C.C.C. pp. 167 and 168)
. . . . .
"The trial judge seemed to think that there is only one concern namely, the impact on the subject of the seizure, but, it is obvious from the judgment of Dickson, J., that there are two considerations for the court: (1) the impact of the seizure on the subject; (2) the seizure's rationality in furthering some valid government objective. (C.C.C. p. 168)
. . . . .
"In resolving this issue, I am mindful of the statement by Dickson, J., that the '... guarantee of security from
unreasonable
... seizure only protects a
reasonable
expectation'. In the absence of some special right, a person cannot commit an offence against the Fisheries Act or Regulations with impunity nor is he entitled to expect that anything used in the commission of the offence -- in this case, fishing nets -- should be exempt from seizure and possible forfeiture. What he is entitled to expect -- and Crown counsel concedes this -- is that prior to the hearing of the application under s. 59(5) he will know the nature of the offence which is alleged to have been committed and which prompted the seizure. When one looks at the issue in this light one can only conclude that seizure in this case was reasonable. Surely it is not unreasonable that a peace officer, or other person charged with the enforcement of an Act, should be empowered to seize something which, he believes on reasonable grounds, is being used in the commission of an offence. Crown counsel referred to a number of cases which he submitted to support his argument that seizure in this case was not unreasonable, including some decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court relating to the seizure of vessels which were being used to commit a criminal offence. I do not intend to refer to them because I think the guiding authority for us is the decision in Hunter v. Southam. Considering all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the provisions of ss. 58(6) and 59(5)(b) and (c) are not inconsistent with s. 8 of the Charter." (C.C.C. pp. 169 and 170)