 [1] 
   
 Shore, J. 
 : In  
 Baron v. Canada (Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) 
 , 2009 FCA 81, 387 N.R. 278, Justice Marc Nadon summarized the law regarding deferrals of removal: 
 
 
 
 [51] ... After a careful and thorough review of the relevant statutory provisions and jurisprudence pertaining thereto, Mr. Justice Pelletier circumscribed the boundaries of an enforcement officer's discretion to defer. In Reasons which I find myself unable to improve, he made the following points: 
 
 
 
 - There are a range of factors that can validly influence the timing of removal on even the narrowest reading of section 48, such as those factors related to making effective travel arrangements and other factors affected by those arrangements, such as children's school years and pending births or deaths. 
 
 
 
 -  
 The Minister is bound by law to execute a valid removal order and, consequently, any deferral policy should reflect this imperative of the Act. 
  In considering the duty to comply with section 48, the availability of an alternate remedy, such as a right to return, should be given great consideration because it is a remedy other than failing to comply with a positive statutory obligation. In instances where applicants are successful in their H&C applications, they can be made whole by readmission. 
 
 
 
 -  
 In order to respect the policy of the Act which imposes a positive obligation on the Minister, while allowing for some discretion with respect to the timing of a removal, deferral should be reserved for those applications where failure to defer will expose the applicant to the risk of death, extreme sanction or inhumane treatment. With respect to H&C applications, absent special considerations, such applications will not justify deferral unless based upon a threat to personal safety. 
 
 
 
 - Cases where the only harm suffered by the applicant will be family hardship can be remedied by readmitting the person to the country following the successful conclusion of the pending application. 
 
 
 
 ... 
 
 
 
 [80] By virtue of section 48(2) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , R.S.C. 2001, c. 29 (IRPA),  
 once a "removal order is enforceable, the foreign national against whom it was made must leave Canada immediately and it must be enforced as soon as is reasonably practicable." 
  I agree with my colleague that jurisprudence is conclusive that the enforcement officer's discretion is limited. However, ultimately an enforcement officer is intended to do nothing more than enforce a removal order. While enforcement officers are granted the discretion to fix new removal dates, they are not intended to defer removal to an indeterminate date. On the facts before us, the date of the decision on the H&C application was unknown and unlikely to be imminent, and thus, the enforcement officer was being asked to delay removal indeterminately. An indeterminate deferral was simply not within the enforcement officer's powers ... 
 
 
 
 [81] Over the years, the duties of enforcement officers have not changed, and yet, the bases upon which applicants rely to obtain deferrals have dramatically increased. I am of the view that the scope of the enforcement officer's discretion cannot be changed by virtue of the requests made. An enforcement officer's role is not to assess the best interests of the children or the probability of success of any application. An enforcement officer's role should remain limited and deferral should be contemplated in very limited circumstances. 
 
 
 
 [82] The legislation has not, to my knowledge, provided a new step to claimants who desire yet another assessment of their circumstances. Claimants already have the refugee application process, the pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) process and the H&C application in addition to judicial reviews of those processes and the stay before removal. 
 
 
 
 [83] In this case, it appears that the claimants want to open yet another avenue of review by asking the enforcement officer to reassess information that has already been examined by administrative tribunals and that was the subject of judicial review. For the enforcement officer to comply with this request for reassessment would be akin to the enforcement officer making a quasi-judicial order without the benefit of hearing from opposing counsel. It's time to stop this abusive cycle.