 [2] 
  Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) has published  
 Processing Student Authorizations 
  [see footnote 1] ("the  
 Guideline 
 ") for the use of officers in assessing applications for student visas. Guidelines, of course, must be used with care. They can serve as "'general policy' or 'rough rules of thumb'" to structure the discretion conferred upon the visa officer. [see footnote 2] Guidelines, however, should not fetter the visa officer's exercise of discretion by crystallizing into binding and conclusive rules. [see footnote 3] It is of interest, in this application for judicial review, to note the extent to which the  
 Guideline 
  reflects the spirit of s. 3(e) of the  
 Immigration Act 
  [see footnote 4] in highlighting the benefits foreign students bring to Canada. Section 3.5.1 of the  
 Guideline 
  sets out factors underlying the assessment of student bona fides: 
 
 
 
 "There are two major factors underlying the assessment of student bona fides. 
 
 
 
 "First, foreign students have not represented a control or enforcement problem for Canada. Second, there is a new and growing realization in Canada that foreign students yield significant benefits for our economy. 
 
 
 
 "In administering its foreign student program, CIC must support the policies of other federal government departments, provinces and educational institutions who are anxious to capitalize on the potential which foreign academic talent represents. 
 
 
 
 "In establishing whether a foreign student is a bona fide visitor, officers should be guided by the knowledge that foreign students educated in Canada provide needed links for trade and investment, and that they are an excellent source of future skilled immigrants. It is not uncommon for highly qualified students, particularly those at the graduate level, to work for a year after completing their course of studies and apply for permanent residence status through visa offices in the USA. CIC views this development as a positive outcome. 
 
 
 
 "Foreign students have the burden of proving to the satisfaction of officers that they are bona fide visitors.  
 However, in these cases, the general question of bona fides is not so much whether the applicant is a prospective immigrant, but whether the applicant is a prospective illegal immigrant. 
 " (Emphasis added) 
 
 
 