[8]
In
Lam v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [1998] F.C.J. No. 1239; 152 F.T.R. 316 (T.D.), Rothstein, J. (as he then was), considered the discretionary power accorded to a visa officer under s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
. In that case, the application for permanent residence was denied without a personal interview. The applicant had applied for permanent residence in the category of Chef-Cook, but he had no experience in that occupation. In considering the circumstances giving rise to the exercise of the discretionary power under s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
, Rothstein, J., stated as follows:
"Section 11(3) does not specify what is required to engage the visa officer's exercise of discretion under it. Nothing precludes the visa officer, on his or her own motion, from proceeding under s. 11(3) if he or she considers that it is warranted to do so. However, if an applicant wishes the visa officer to exercise discretion under s. 11(3), it would seem that some form of application would be required. While there is no prescribed wording to which an application must adhere, I would think the application would at least have to indicate some good reasons why a units of assessment determination would not reflect the chances of successful establishment in Canada by the applicant. There was no such application here.
"6 The applicant says he would not know that he must make an application to request s. 11(3) consideration until he is told his application fails under the units of assessment determination, and this is a reason for a personal interview. However, this argument is misplaced. The visa officer is not required to provide a piecemeal ongoing determination and advise the applicant at each stage, even if a personal interview is conducted. The units of assessment award is the conventional way in which visa officers determine whether an immigrant visa may be issued. Section 11(3) is exceptional. Where an applicant has reason to believe that he or she may be established in Canada, irrespective of the units of assessment determination, he or she should apply for a determination under s. 11(3) setting forth relevant reasons. Otherwise, while the visa officer may do so on his or her own volition, there is no obligation on the visa officer to exercise a discretion under s. 11(3). As indicated, there was no application by the applicant for the exercise of discretion by the visa officer under s. 11(3) in this case."