[7]
Chief Justice Dickson went on to emphasize the necessity to look at the direct use to which a taxpayer puts borrowed money, reaffirming the reluctance of the Supreme Court of Canada to overlook a clearly ineligible direct use of borrowed money whenever an indirect eligible use of funds can be found. In that regard, at pages 5065 and 5066, he stated the following:
"In my view, neither the Income Tax Act nor the weight of judicial authority permits the courts to ignore the direct use to which a taxpayer puts borrowed money. ...
"One finds in the Act not only the distinction within s. 20(1)(c)(i) between eligible and ineligible uses of funds, but other provisions which also require the tracing of funds to particular uses in a manner inconsistent with the argument of the Trust. Section 20(3) (formerly s. 11(3b)) stipulates, for example, that interest on money borrowed to repay an existing loan shall be deemed to have been used for the purpose for which the previous borrowings were used. This provision would, of course, be unnecessary if interest on borrowed money were deductible when the taxpayer had income-earning properties to preserve. On the contrary, however, for taxation years prior to the enactment of s. 11(3b) in S.C. 1953-54, c. 57, s. 2(6), it had been held that such interest was not deductible since the borrowings were used to repay a loan and not to earn income: Interior Breweries Ltd. v. M.N.R., 55 D.T.C. 1090 at p. 1093 (Exch. Ct.).
"It is not surprising, therefore, that the cases interpreting s. 20(1)(c)(i) and its predecessor provisions have not favoured the view that a direct ineligible use of borrowed money ought to be overlooked whenever an indirect eligible use of funds can be found. ...
"The leading case from this court on the availability of the interest  deduction, Canada Safeway Ltd. v. M.N.R., also demonstrates a reluctance to overlook a clearly ineligible direct use of borrowed money in order to favour the taxpayer by characterizing the transaction on the basis of a less direct eligible use of borrowings. ... Justice Rand stated, at p. 726:
'No doubt there is in fact a causal connection between the purchase of the stock and the benefits ultimately received; but the statutory language cannot be extended to such a remote consequence; it could be carried to any length in a chain of subsidiaries; and to say that such a thing was envisaged by the ordinary expression used in the statute is to speculate and to interpret.'
"Referring to the interest expense deduction for borrowed money used for the purpose of earning income from business, Rand, J., concluded at p. 727:
'What is aimed at by the section is an employment of the borrowed funds immediately within the company's business and not one that effects its purpose in such an indirect and remote manner.'"