[99]
While being cautious not to enlarge the meaning of the word "citizen" used in the
1910 Immigration Act
, the fundamental purpose of the
Canadian Nationals Act
has been described in the following way by the Hon. Charles Joseph Doherty, Minister of Justice in 1921:
"... The Bill does not contemplate to in any way affect the status or position of any Canadian as a British subject. Notwithstanding its enactment we shall all remain, of course, British subjects; and under the definition as proposed nobody will be a Canadian national who is not a British subject.
But the purpose of the Bill is to define a particular class of British subjects who, in addition to having all the rights and all the obligations of British subjects, have particular rights because of the fact that they are Canadians
.
. . . . .
"...
The
Immigration Act
stands absolutely untouched, and as regards immigration will continue absolutely to govern. Our reference to it is only for the purpose of bringing in as Canadian nationals everybody who is a Canadian citizen under the
Immigration Act
. It does not make anybody a Canadian citizen who under the
Immigration Act
is not a Canadian citizen
. It does not remove any disability, as, for instance, in the case of the wife, the disability resulting from the fact that she has not been landed in Canada. The
Immigration Act
stands as the law, absolutely untouched. All that this
Act
is doing is defining what is a Canadian national.
. . . . .
"... Our Canadian national will be
that kind of British subject who is in a special manner subject to and owes obedience to Canadian laws as administered through Parliament and the Government and ultimately His Majesty
, he being King of these Dominions just as he is King of Great Britain and the entire Empire.
. . . . .
"...
We are defining our own Canadian national
. Some other of the self-governing Dominions may deem it wise to define their nationals - Australia, for instance - but Australia will do exactly what she likes about it.
I do not think the Canadian Parliament would feel that we had to go and ask anybody else's leave to define who we are. It is for us to recognize who is a Canadian and who is not
." (Emphasis added)
(see
House of Commons Debates
(8 March 1921) at 645, 772, 776, 785)