[125]
Sections 4, 5 and 9 of the
1947 Citizenship Act
read as follows:
"4. A person, born before the commencement of this Act, is a natural-born Canadian citizen: -
(a) if he was born in Canada or on a Canadian ship and has not become an alien at the commencement of this Act; or
(b) if he was born outside of Canada elsewhere than on a Canadian ship and his father, or in the case of a person born out of wedlock, his mother
(i) was born in Canada or on a Canadian ship and has not become an alien at the time of that person's birth, or
(ii) was, at the time of that person's birth, a British subject who had Canadian domicile,
if, at the commencement of this Act, that person has not become an alien, and has either been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence as a minor.
"5. A person, born after the commencement of this Act, is a natural-born Canadian citizen:
(a) if he was born in Canada or on a Canadian ship; or
(b) if he is born outside of Canada elsewhere than on a Canadian ship, and
(i) his father, or in the case of a child born out of wedlock, his mother, at the time of that person's birth, is a Canadian citizen by reason of having been born in Canada or on a Canadian ship, or having been granted a certificate of citizenship of having been a Canadian citizen at the commencement of this Act, and
(ii) the fact of his birth is registered at a consulate or with the Minister, within two years after its occurrence or within such extended period as may be authorized in special cases by the Minister, in accordance with the regulations.
(. . . . .)
"9(1) A person other than a natural-born Canadian citizen, is a Canadian citizen, if he
(a) was granted, or his name was included in a certificate of naturalization and he has not become an alien at the commencement of this Act; or
(b) immediately before the commencement of this Act was a British subject who had Canadian domicile; or in the case of a woman,
(c) if she
(i) before the commencement of this Act, was married to a man who, if this Act had come into force immediately before the marriage, would have been a natural-born Canadian citizen as provided in section four of this Act or a Canadian citizen as provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection, and
(ii) at the commencement of this Act, is a British subject and has been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence.
"9(2) A person who is a Canadian citizen under subsection one of this section shall be deemed, for the purpose of Part III of this Act, to have become a Canadian citizen: -
(a) where he was granted, or his name was included in, a certificate of naturalization, on the date of this certificate;
(b) where he is a Canadian citizen by reason of being a British subject who had Canadian domicile, on the date he acquired Canadian domicile; and
(c) in the case of a woman to whom paragraph (c) of subsection one of this section applies, on the date of the marriage or on which she became a British subject or on which she was lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence, whichever is the latest date."