[12]
The essence of the Board's decision is contained in the following excerpts found at pages 9 and 10 of its reasons:
"... where a grievance alleging a termination of employment is referred to adjudication,
in the face of a jurisdictional objection, it is incumbent on the adjudicator to determine whether in reality there has been a termination of employment pursuant to the
PSEA
, as opposed to a subterfuge or 'camouflage', (the term used by the Supreme Court in the
Jacmain
decision
). What evidence is required in order for an adjudicator to make that initial determination depends on the nature of the purported termination. I agree with counsel for the grievor that, when termination purports to be a rejection on probation for cause per section 28 of the
PSEA
,
the adjudicator must determine whether the rejection on probation was 'cause' as that term is used in section 28
. It is interesting to note that the term 'cause' is found both in section 28 and in the complementary legislation of section 11 of the
Financial Administration Act
. Clearly therefore, this is a term that has some meaning and importance in the context of the rights of employees in the federal Public Service.
"
In my view, in order to demonstrate that the adjudicator cannot address the employee's grievance, the employer must provide some evidence which would show that there is a real employment-related reason for the termination of the grievor's employment during the probationary period. In this instance, the employer has utterly failed to do this; despite being invited to do so, the employer has called no evidence, but rather is insistent that it needs to do nothing beyond establishing the existence of a letter purporting to reject the grievor on probation
. I have no idea who is the author of the decision, what factors he considered in making that decision, what are the standards that are alluded to in the rejection on probation letter and indeed whether such standards actually exist... . While I have some doubts as to whether the term 'cause' as found in section 28 means 'just cause' as urged by counsel for the grievor,
I believe that there is a minimum threshold of evidence required from the employer, which would enable the adjudicator to make a reasonably informed decision as to whether he or she has jurisdiction to determine the grievance on the merits. I have no doubt that this does require the employer, through proper evidence, to demonstrate that there was indeed a 'reason' for its actions
.
"Acceding to the employer's submissions would open the door to decisions which may be entirely arbitrary, based on irrelevant considerations, and possibly without a scintilla of legitimacy. It should be kept in mind that it is the employer who is uniquely in a position to know why it took the decision that it did; in the absence of providing at least minimal evidence and information, it puts the grievor in the invidious position of having to speculate as to the reasons behind the decision, and thereby assume an almost impossible burden of seeking to demonstrate bad faith. This is not mandated by the legislation in question, and flies in the face of simple fairness and common sense ...".
"... I believe that there is a requirement on the part of the employer to demonstrate before the adjudicator that section 28 of the
PSEA
applies, in which case the adjudicator is deprived of jurisdiction in accordance with subsection 92(3) of the
PSSRA
.
However, this falls short of requiring the employer to demonstrate 'just cause' as that term is normally understood in a labour relations context. That is, I do not believe the employer has the burden of justifying its decision to terminate the employee, beyond providing a bona fide employment-related reason for doing so
. It is required only to demonstrate that it is acting in accordance with the provisions of the
PSEA
. To hold otherwise, would be contrary to subsection 92(3) of the
PSSRA
." (emphasis mine)
D. Issues
(1) In the circumstances of this particular case does judicial review lie from the Board's interlocutory decision?
(2) Did the adjudicator err in law by ruling the employer had the initial burden of leading evidence to establish the termination of employment was pursuant to section 28 of the
PSEA
?
E. Legislation