[6]
Through a solicitor, they applied for a further review on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. In a letter dated the 1st day of April, 1991 to the Canadian Immigration Centre in London, Ontario, the Applicant's solicitor provided the following information and material:
"After our conversation my understanding of their situation is that their file has been referred to your office as the review of their home country has been completed by the Ottawa Office and has been found not to be a dangerous country to return to.
"The final stage is a review of their situation by your office prior to removal to determine if there are any solid humanitarian and compassionate grounds on which they may remain in Canada. This applies to both Mr. and Mrs. Lemiecha and their children.
"Accordingly, I have commenced the process to obtain information on their role in the Canadian community and how well they are adapting to Canada and how important their continued presence in the country would be to that community.
"Please therefore find enclosed the following material which should assist you.
1. Letter from Mr. and Mrs. Lemiecha expressing their desire to remain in Canada addressed to the Minister.
2. Original translations of educational certificates for both Mr. and Mrs. Lemiecha showing their education background in Poland.
3. Letter of support from Mr. and Mrs. Krzyanowski, senior citizens, for the Lemiecha's.
4. Letter of support from Walter Soroka and Apolnia Gienia, both disabled Canadians for the Lemiecha's.
5. Letter of support and an employment offer to Teresa Lemiecha by owner of the Staropolskie Delikatesy.
6. Letter of support for the family by the Pastor of St. Stanislaus Church.
7. Letter of evaluation of the children by Principal of St. Ann School with November Report for both children.
"There are two areas which need further information and that is a medical update for the son Rafal and further information of the support to the disabled people Walter Soroka, and Apolonia Sienia which I plan to do by affidavit.
"I hope to have this material before the end of this month and if you require any update of the information provided so far please do not hesitate to contact my office."