[8]
The substance of the report, prepared by Dr. Bronte Golda and entitled "Medical Legal Report" reads as follows:
"I am writing this medical report at your request in regards to this nine-year old boy. You are wishing for me to provide you with some explanation of the report that you received from Dr. Peer who is a Pediatrician, who, at my request, saw this boy. On interviewing the mother and going through various reports from Poland, I am in the position to give you a background history on this boy. Between 1987 and 1988 this boy was admitted to a hospital twice, when he was treated with steroids intravenously, inhalation and the treatment lasted about a week. Also, the Polish system is slightly different than the Canadian system, when the patient gets sick at home and the family calls the ambulance, the doctor always attend the ambulance driver and provides the immediate necessary treatment at home. This means that each visit to the patient's house may not end up with taking that particular patient to the hospital. According to the mother, this boy was treated by an ambulance physician almost once per week with an attack of asthma, and the treatment was consistent with inhalation and intravenous hydrocortisone at home. Since they arrived in Hamilton, this boy only uses a Ventolin puffer maybe once a year when he gets a cold. He does not require any IV steroids which, of course, will have severe adverse side effects since he is so young, and also will create the asthma to be dependent on steroids which would end up causing him to have tremendous side effects in the long-run. In regards to the area where they live, they are coming from the east part of Poland, which was severely exposed to Chernobyl radiation and this could have had some effect on this child.
"In summary then, I think it not very human to tell this boy, after he spent some years in Canada, to go back to Poland. Where I would say there is quite a high chance of a return of his asthmatic attacks, due to severe pollution, where the care is not readily available with the newest methods of treating asthma. Also, this boy had done very well at school. His English is great. Since everything is coming along very good for these people, I would not see any reason why Canada has to send them back."