[12]
Here is how John, on cross-examination, described his dealings with William. The passages are recorded in volume 2, pp. 156, 157 and 158:
"Q. Now, I think you said earlier that you never were told that Cantex and Northland were associated. Were you ever told there was a problem that you could be associated?
A. I wasn't told as directly as that. The context in which the discussions took place were that if things weren't done a certain way then there could be, and I didn't remember the term association, but there could be a higher tax rate.
. . . . .
Q. ... So, were you aware of -- well, you knew that your brother saw a problem right from the moment Cantex was incorporated, that's correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And you said that it was an arm's length problem, he told you?
A. Yes.
Q. And from about '74, '75 on, I think you told me in Discovery, you were aware of the problem?
A. Yes, I began to become aware of that, yes.
Q. Yes, and is that one of the reasons why in sorting out, trying to finalize your problems with your brother, you tried to find ways and means of coming to a resolution with your brother without getting into any pitfalls taxwise?
A. What happened was, as we might be aware of by now, I was getting quite frustrated by the lack of being able to resolve these issues, and Cantex had not been in a position to pay very much tax, because they were buying equipment and so on, and there weren't extra monies available.
And so, despite, from my point of view, despite what the tax ramifications might be, I wanted the matter resolved.
. . . . .
Q. Okay. Please tell me how it was, because that is how I -- when you went through the years.
A. Yes, as I pointed out, when Cantex was formed or incorporated, and Bill didn't want to take any shares, and we would formalize those matters at a later date, the Wiltse lands were acquired, albeit in Bill's name, and the agreement then was, the agreement was that after Cantex paid out Northland for the equipment, the arrangement, let's call it that, was to be formalized.
Q. Yes.
A. Once the payments were made, the final payments were made, I asked him for formalization of the arrangement, if you will, because I wanted to know where I stood.
Q. That was some time in 1974?
A. 1974."