[2]
The applicant filed its application to register the trademark Orchard Blends on August 28, 1985, it being a proposed mark for use in association with "fruit juices, nonalcoholic beverages containing fruit juices and concentrates and other preparations for making the same, namely fruit flavoured crystals". The application was for proposed use. The opponent filed a statement of opposition on January 19, 1987, and an amended statement of opposition on April 29, 1988. It alleged three grounds of opposition: that the proposed mark is not registrable as clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of the applied for wares; that the applicant is not the person entitled pursuant to s. 16(3)(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
, because as at its filing date the proposed mark was confusing with the opponent's previously applied for trademark Welch's Orchard which had been applied for on October 23, 1984, for use in association with "fruit juices and fruit drinks", the application still pending at the time of the applicant's application; and that the proposed mark is not entitled to registration because it is not distinctive. In his decision of May 31, 1991, on behalf of the Registrar for Trademarks, D.J. Martin of the Trademarks Opposition Board allowed the opposition and refused registration. He found that the proposed mark is not clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of the associated wares. He found, however, that the applicant had not met the onus on it of establishing no reasonable likelihood of confusion. In applying the criteria in s. 6(5) of the
Trade-marks Act
he found that both the applicant's and the opponent's trademarks are inherently weak with little inherent distinctiveness and no proven acquired distinctiveness. He considered that the length of time that the respective marks had been in use was not relevant, presumably because there was little or no evidence of use of either mark. He also found that the wares and the trades of the parties are identical and that there was a high degree of resemblance between the marks. For these reasons he found that the applicant had not established the lack of reasonable likelihood of confusion. Having reached this conclusion he found it unnecessary to consider whether the applicant's mark is distinctive.