[7]
The applicant had filed before the Member of the Opposition Board on affidavit of Shirley McDonald with state of the register evidence showing that as of the date of this application there were nine registrations of eight different owners of trademarks including the word "Orchard" for fruit juices (some including other natural products as well). About this affidavit the hearing Member said:
"... However, on my review of the McDonald affidavit, I cannot agree. First, it should be noted that the McDonald affidavit must be given diminished weight since Ms. McDonald did not provide copies of the registrations located nor did she provide complete particulars of those registrations. For example, she did not indicate the basis for registration. Thus, it may be that a number of the registrations are based on use and registration abroad rather than on use in Canada.
"Even if there were no deficiencies in the McDonald affidavit, it would establish at best that, as of the material time (i.e., August 28, 1985), there were nine registrations standing in the name of eight different owners for trademarks including the word 'orchard' for fruit juices and the like. Considering the relatively small number of registrations located and the absence of evidence of use of those marks, I am unable to make any significant inferences about the state of the marketplace regarding such marks as of the material time. In other words, the McDonald affidavit is insufficient to allow me to conclude that the word 'orchard' was in common use as a component of trademarks for fruit juices and the like."
A new affidavit of Shirley McDonald was filed in the hearing before me. It included the actual registrations, with their particulars, of the nine marks on the register prior to the date of the applicant's application and of a tenth of Orchards Hawaii Pog filed and registered after that date. An affidavit of another deponent was filed before me with respect to a few purchases in 1991 of products of third parties bearing the word "orchard" as part of their name. Excerpts from telephone directories were also exhibited to this affidavit showing the use of the word "orchard" in connection with fruit marketing businesses. A further affidavit filed on appeal exhibited a number of excerpts from government publications referring to orchards and orchard trees. I am somewhat mystified by these latter exhibits, but take them to demonstrate that the word "orchard" is not clearly descriptive of the fruit juices and similar products associated with the applicant's proposed trademark.