[21]
In
Bhardwaj v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [1998] F.T.R. Uned. 446; [1998] F.C.J. No. 1117 (T.D.), at paragraphs 5-6, the Federal Court was also very clear about the importance to be given to medical reports when evaluating the claimant's credibility:
"Contrary to this finding, at page 389 of the Tribunal Record, there appears the May 8, 1995 report of Dr. Donald E. Payne who presented to the CRDD a psychiatric evaluation on the mother, Neerja Bhardwaj. At page 2 of the report, the following statement appears:
'It is my opinion that she is suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder which is consistent with her history of being shot, her ongoing fears of harm to the family in India, and the incident when the police threatened the family with disappearance. Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder is the diagnostic category in the American Psychiatric Association's DSM-IV classification system, which describes the development of characteristic symptoms following a psychologically disturbing event which is outside the range of usual human experience and which is usually experienced with marked fear, terror and helplessness. She continues to suffer from marked symptoms of difficulty sleeping with bad dreams; intrusive memories of her upsetting experiences; increased upset with reminders of the experiences; anxiety with headaches, shaking in her body and an increased startle response; depression with brooding, crying and social withdrawal; poor memory and concentration; increased irritability; and a conditioned fear in Canada of the police and knocks on the door. She is able to hold in much of her emotional distress because of her need to be strong for her family, especially her oldest daughter.'
"I find that the CRDD made its decision without regard to the evidence just quoted, and therefore, respecting Rashmi's mother, father, and sibling, under s. 18.1(4)(d) of the
Federal Court Act
, I set the decision aside and refer their applications to a differently constituted panel for redetermination. The decision respecting Rashmi stands."