 [14] 
  Here, because the proposed trademark is the colour and shape of the wares, Monsanto has the onus of proving that the "get-up", that is the appearance of the tablet, is recognized by the public as distinctive of its wares. It is therefore incumbent upon the respondent to show that the colour white, applied to a hexagonal tablet, distinguishes its tablet from other white and hexagonal tablets sold in Canada. In this regard, it is not sufficient for the respondent to establish that Canadians know that Monsanto's misoprostol is sold in a white tablet or a white and hexagonal tablet. Rather, it must show that physicians, pharmacists or patients can and do use the proposed trademark in choosing whether to prescribe, dispense or request Monsanto's misoprostol product. In  
 Novopharm Ltd. v. Bayer Inc. 
 , supra, Evans., J., stated as follows: 
 
 
 
 "First, the burden of establishing the distinctiveness of a mark rests on the applicant, both in the opposition proceeding before the Registrar and on an appeal to this Court. Thus, Bayer must establish on a balance of probabilities that in 1992, when Novopharm filed its opposition to the application, ordinary consumers associated dusty rose, round extended-release tablets of the size of the 10 mg ADALAT tablet, with Bayer, or a single source of manufacture or supply ... 
 
 
 
 "Second, the 'ordinary consumers' to be considered for this purpose include not only physicians and pharmacists, but also the 'ultimate consumers', that is the patients for whom ADALAT tablets are prescribed and to whom they are supplied, even though their only access to nifedipine is through a physician's prescription:  
 CIBA-Geigy Canada Ltd. v. Apotex Limited 
 , [1992] 3 S.C.R. 120. 
 
 
 
 "In  
 CIBA-Geigy 
  the Court held that the elements of the tort of passing-off were as applicable to pharmaceutical products as to any other. Accordingly, it was relevant to consider whether the 'get-up' of the plaintiff's goods had acquired a distinctiveness that would lead patients to identify that 'get-up' with a single source, so that they were likely to be confused into thinking that another's product, with a similar appearance to that of the plaintiff, emanated from the same source as the plaintiff's. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "Third, while I accept that the colour, shape and size of a product may together be capable in law of constituting a trademark, the resulting mark is, as a general rule, likely to be weak:  
 Smith Kline & French Canada Ltd. v. Registrar of Trademarks 
  (1987), 9 F.T.R. 129, 131 (F.C.T.D.). 
 
 
 
 "In this case, pink round small tablets are commonplace in the pharmaceutical market. This means that Bayer has a heavy burden to discharge in proving on the balance of probabilities that in 1992 those properties had a secondary meaning, so that ordinary consumers associated the tablets with a single source. The fact that, when Novopharm filed its objection, ADALAT were the only extended-release nifedipine tablets on the market is in itself insufficient to establish a secondary meaning. 
 
 
 
 "Fourth, it is not fatal to an application that consumers may also use means other than the mark for identifying the product with a single source. Thus, while pharmacists rely mainly on the brand name and other identifying indicia on the stock bottles and packaging containing the product, or the inscription on the tablets, which is not part of the mark, if there is evidence that to any significant degree they also recognized the product by its appearance (excluding the markings on the tablet because they are not part of the mark), this may be sufficient to establish the distinctiveness of the mark." 
