 [34] 
  At pages 203 to 208 of the applicant's application record, the applicant lists the following passages from the documentary evidence that was before the PRRA Officer, regarding the negative environment for Roma in Hungary: 
 
 
 
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2002- Hungary, U.S. Department of State 
 
 
 
 "There were reports that some police used excessive force, beat and harassed suspects, particularly Roma. 
 
 
 
 "Anti-Semitic and racial discrimination persisted and a number of racially motivated attacks, particularly against Roma, occurred during the year. 
 
 
 
 "Societal discrimination against Roma was a serious problem. 
 
 
 
 "Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 
 
 
 
 "The law prohibits such practices; however, the police occasionally used excessive force, beat and harassed suspects, particularly Roma. 
 
 
 
 "In January Pest County dropped charges against thirteen officers in a 2001 incident in the village of Bag, citing a lack of evidence. Police were accused of assaulting several Roma during a raid on a funeral wake. 
 
 
 
 "Reports of police abuse against Roma were common, but many Roma were fearful to seek legal remedies or notify NGOs (see Section 1.c.). Police also failed to intervene to prevent violence against Roma. 
 
 
 
 "According to the Roma Press Center, on January 29, in Pecsvarad village, an unknown assailant set fire to the Roma minority self-government building. The fire extinguished itself and damage was minor. Police conducted an investigation but did not identify a suspect. At year's end there had been no progress in this case." 
 
 
 
 Human Rights Watch 2002 
 
 
 
 "The situation for many Hungarian Roma remained precarious. With average life expectancy ten years shorter than the rest of the population and an unemployment rate ten times higher than the national average, Roma faced discrimination in employment, housing, education, and the criminal justice system, as well as physical attacks." 
 
 
 
 This statement is followed by examples of incidents that occurred recently. 
 
 
 
 "Police misconduct against Roma continued." 
 
 
 
 Amnesty International Report 2001 
 
 
 
 " 
 Roma 
 
 
 
 "In June the Council of Europe's European Commission against Racism and Intolerance noted that "severe problems of racism and intolerance continue in Hungary". It noted that the incidence of discrimination towards the Roma continued in all fields of life and expressed concern particularly about police ill-treatment. However, at a conference where this report was discussed by local non-governmental organizations, a Ministry of Justice official stated that the government did not support proposals for a separate anti-discrimination act on the grounds that existing legislation provided sufficient protection." 
 
 
 
 Written comments of the European Roma Rights Center Concerning the Republic of Hungary (April 2002) 
 
 
 
 ". . . Roma are the victims of racially-motivated violence at the hands of law enforcement authorities, skinheads and others. Law enforcement authorities, meanwhile, systematically fail to provide effective protection to Roma. 
 
 
 
 "Discussion - High levels of racially motivated violence and discrimination against Roma in Hungary raise serious concerns with regard to the Hungarian government's compliance with its obligations under the Covenant. Anti-Romani sentiment in Hungary today is very strong, and provides rich soil for serious violations of the fundamental rights of Roma."