[2]
In
Leung v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration)
, [1994] F.C.J. No. 774 (QL), this Court overturned the decision of the Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board, denying the applicants' applications for status as Convention refugees, on the basis that their fear of persecution was not objectively well-founded. The Court stated:
[14] Both divisions of this Court have consistently held that the Board's decisions must be based on the totality of the evidence contained in the Record. This does not mean, however, that the Board must summarize all of the evidence, or that a decision will be quashed simply because the Board has failed to refer to some minor piece of documentary evidence in its reasons. Nevertheless, the Board is under a very clear duty to justify its credibility findings with specific and clear reference to the evidence.
[15] This duty becomes particularly important in cases such as this one where the Board has based its non-credibility finding on perceived "implausibilities" in the claimants' stories rather than on internal inconsistencies and contradictions in their narratives or their demeanour while testifying. Findings of implausibility are inherently subjective assessments which are largely dependant on the individual Board member's perceptions of what constitutes rational behaviour. The appropriateness of a particular finding can therefore only be assessed if the Board's decision clearly identifies all of the facts which form the basis for their conclusions.
[16] Given this clear obligation on the Board to base its decision on the totality of the evidence, combined with the duty to justify its credibility findings, it must be assumed that the Board's reasons contain a reasonably complete account of the facts which form the basis of their decision. The Board will therefore err when it fails to refer to relevant evidence which could potentially refute their conclusions of implausibility. My review of the Board's implausibility findings reveals that such an error has occurred here. I will deal with each implausibility finding.