 [13] 
  Mr. Justice Robertson of Federal Court of Appeal, in  
 Apotex Inc. v. Merck & Co. and Merck Frosst Canada Inc. 
 , [see foot­note 8] summarized the principles governing the award of an order of mandamus: 
 
 
 
 "Several principal requirements must be satisfied before mandamus will issue. The following general framework finds support in the extant jurisprudence of this Court. 
 
 
 
 1. There must be a public legal duty to act;  
 
 
 
 2. The duty must be owed to the appli­cant;  
 
 
 
 3. There is a clear right to performance of that duty, in particular: 
 
 
 
 (a) the applicant has satisfied all condi­tions precedent giving rise to the duty; 
 
 
 
 (b) there was (i) a prior demand for performance of the duty; (ii) a reason­able time to comply with the demand unless refused outright; and (iii) a subsequent refusal which can be either expressed or implied, e.g. unreasonable delay;  
 
 
 
 4. Where the duty sought to be enforced is discretionary, the following rules apply: 
 
 
 
 (a) in exercising a discretion, the deci­sion-maker must not act in a manner which can be characterized as 'unfair', 'oppressive' or demonstrate 'flagrant impropriety' or 'bad faith';  
 
 
 
 (b) mandamus is unavailable if the decision-maker's discretion is charac­terized as being 'unqualified', 'abso­lute', 'permissive' or 'unfettered';  
 
 
 
 (c) in the exercise of a 'fettered' dis­cretion, the decision-maker must act upon 'relevant', as opposed to 'irrele­vant', considerations;  
 
 
 
 (d) mandamus is unavailable to compel the exercise of a 'fettered discretion' in a particular way; and  
 
 
 
 (e) mandamus is only available when the decision-maker's discretion is 'spent'; i.e., the applicant has a vested right to the performance of the duty. 
 
 
 
 5. No other adequate remedy is available to the applicant; 
 
 
 
 6. The order sought will be of some practical value or effect; 
 
 
 
 7. The Court in the exercise of its discre­tion finds no equitable bar to the relief sought; 
 
 
 
 8. On a 'balance of convenience' an order in the nature of mandamus should (or should not) issue." 
 
