[20]
Thereafter, in accord with procedures under the
Customs Act
, the plaintiff requested a decision of the Minister, and that decision, dated February 15, 1989 was as noted above. The decision was made pursuant to ss. 131 and 133, pertinent portions of which provide:
"131(1) ... the Minister shall, as soon as is reasonably possible having regard to the circumstances, consider and weigh the circumstances of the case and decide, in respect of the goods or conveyance that was seized or with respect to which a notice was served under s. 124,
(a) in the case of goods or a conveyance seized or with respect to which a notice was served on the ground that this Act or the regulations were contravened in respect thereof, whether the Act or the regulations were so contravened; or
. . . . .
"(2) The Minister shall forthwith on making a decision under subsection (1) serve on the person who requested the decision written notice thereof.
"(3) The Minister's decision under subsection (1) is not subject to review or to be restrained, prohibited, removed, set aside or otherwise dealt with except to the extent and in the manner provided by subsection 135(1).
"133(1) Where the Minister decides, pursuant to s. 131, that there has been a contravention of this Act or the regulations in respect of the goods or conveyance referred to in that section, and, in the case of a conveyance described in paragraph 131(1)(b), that it was used in the manner described therein, the Minister may, subject to such terms and conditions as he may determine,
(a) return the goods or conveyance on receipt of an amount of money of a value equal to an amount determined under subsection (2) or (3), as the case may be;
(b) remit any portion of any money or security taken; and
. . . . .
"(2) Goods may be returned under paragraph (1)(a) on receipt of an amount of money of a value equal to
(a) the aggregate of the value for duty of the goods and the amount of duties levied thereon, if any, calculated at the rates applicable thereto
(i) at the time of seizure, where the goods have not been accounted for under subsection 32(1), (2) or (5) or where duties or additional duties have become due thereon under ss. 88 to 92, or
(ii) at the time the goods were accounted for under subsection 32(1), (2) or (5), in any other case; or
(b) such lesser amount as the Minister may direct.
. . . . .
"135(1) A person who requests a decision of the Minister under s. 131 may, within ninety days after being notified of the decision, appeal the decision by way of an action to the Federal Court - Trial Division in which that person is the plaintiff and the Minister is the defendant."