[3]
On 14 February 2000 Mr. Wheaton filed an amended notice of application, seeking the same production of material from Canada Post Corporation ("Canada Post") and attaching, by way of background information, a somewhat rambling letter covering 1993 and 1994 dealings with Human Resources Development Canada on the east coast and concluding with a reference to Human Resources Development Canada's recent accounting embarrassment and advice that "at least $1,000,000" to his knowledge, went to Bermuda by way of the Bahamas. Buried in the middle of this letter is what seems to be the crux of the application, a request for Canada Post's records as to a priority post letter, part of which was delivered to Mr. Wheaton at the RCMP office in Prince Rupert:
"I returned to Vancouver in early July, 1994 and looked for a job. I had my mother and a friend collecting my mail and sending it to Vancouver. My mother sent a large manila envelope in July and another one in August. Neither package arrived by Canada Post. A friend sent one letter in August and it to was taken by Canada Post. In Prince Rupert a letter was sent to me by a friend and co-worker, by Priority Post envelope. The Envelope did not arrive. Instead I received a phone call from the Prince Rupert RCMP to come to their office and pick up a cheque that they had at their front desk. I was contacted by the sender of the envelope and told that the RCMP had called her twice and the second interview was serious. She asked if I was in trouble with the Police because their questions were probing and suggested a criminal behaviour of some sort. The officer left my co-worker with the impression that he didn't believe a word she said and wanted a better explanation of her note to me and the reason for sending me a cheque for $150.00. She again explained her letter. My co-worker later contacted my employer and he later raised this issue with me. I must express my concern for my missing mail and that I was being investigated by the RCMP probably at the request of HRDC. Information provided by Ms. Anne Felile of Corporate Security states that the Priority Post envelope did not leave Vancouver. And she provided me with a way to confirm this for myself. Which of course I did."