[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This application for relief in the nature of certiorari and mandamus initially came on for hearing at Toronto, Ontario, on August 13, 1986. Further evidence and argument was presented on August 25th at which time I left the matter open for counsel to make further submissions concerning the uniform treatment of applicants under the policy in issue. Final arguments were heard on January 5, 1987.
[2]
The facts relevant to this application are contained in paragraphs 2 to 4 of the applicant's affidavit sworn on July 29, 1986, and filed July 30th:
"2. I am a citizen of the Peoples' Republic of China, having been born there on November 28, 1960, in Kwang Tong Province, Peoples' Republic of China. I lived in the Peoples' Republic of China, from the date of my birth until 1979 when I left there to travel to Guyana to obtain permanent residence in that country. I left China in 1979 because of the political instability there and I feared that I would become the subject of persecution as a result of the political movements taking place at that time in the Peoples' Republic of China. I applied for permanent residence in Guyana because I had understood that I would be able to obtain a better life there because it was a more politically stable country.
"3. I lived in Guyana from 1979 until 1986 when I returned to China so that on my return trip from China to Guyana, I could stopover in Canada and try to remain permanently in Canada.
"4. When I arrived at the airport in Toronto, Canada, I was interviewed by an immigration officer and ordered detained and my passport seized. An inquiry was scheduled for the 14th day of July 1986 and I was informed at that time of my right to counsel. I then retained the law firm of Cecil L. Rotenberg, Q.C., to represent me. I was informed by my solicitors that the Minister of Immigration for Canada had recently announced a new policy which stated that persons who were citizens of the Peoples' Republic of China would be granted a Minister's Permit with an employment authorization for one year. I sought to take advantage of this program and sought the issuance of a Minister's Permit under this policy. My request was refused and instead my inquiry was ordered to continue wherein I made a refugee claim and an examination under oath is now scheduled for July 29, 1986 at 1:00 p.m."
[3]
The policy referred to in paragraph 4 of the affidavit was adopted as an interim measure to deal with the backlog of refugee claims pending implementation of a new refugee determination system sometime in 1987. The guidelines for this interim policy were released by the respondents on May 15, 1986, in a document entitled
New Procedures: Refugee Determination
and are attached to the affidavit of Cecil L. Rothenberg sworn on July 18, 1986, and filed July 30th. That portion of the policy which the applicant relies upon is contained in Appendix B1, "Procedures for Refugee Claimants after May 21, 1986" (hereafter the "policy"):
"APPENDIX B1
"
PROCEDURES FOR REFUGEE CLAIMANTS AFTER MAY 21, 1986
"As of May 21, 1986, and until the coming into force of the new Refugee Determination System (scheduled for April 1, 1987) the following instructions will apply to all persons who state their intention to claim refugee status and are citizens of the following countries:
. . . . .
"People's Republic of China
. . . . .
"Such persons seeking admission at a port of entry will be reported pursuant to A20(1) and issued a Minister's Permit and, pursuant to R20(5)(f)(i) or (iii) (as the case may be), should be subsequently issued an employment authorization. The Minister's Permit should be made valid for an initial period of 12 months and shall be endorsed to indicate that the person(s) in question is (are) not eligible for support under the Adjustment Assistance Program. The validity of the employment authorization should coincide with the Minister's Permit.
"Persons from the above listed countries who approach an inland office, are reportable under A27(2) and state their intention to make a claim to refugee status, will be reported and issued a Minister's Permit and, as required, an employment authorization pursuant to R20(5)(f)(i) or (iii).
"Those who make their intention known and are not reportable under A27(2) will be informed that there are no provisions for taking an in-status claim. Visitor's status will not be extended and a Minister's Permit as well as an employment authorization issued (if applicable) if and when the person becomes reportable under A27(2).
"The issuance of a Minister's Permit and Employment Authorization will enable the prospective refugee claimant to seek and engage in employment and maintain him/herself until such time as a claim is taken pursuant to A45(1).
"Arrangements for medical examinations should conform to those now in place with respect to persons in the refugee claims stream."
On June 13, 1986, a telex was sent by the respondents to the Regional Offices of the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission, clarifying this policy as follows:
"Ref Appendix B1 to Memorandum of May 15, 1986 from Executive Director, Immigration concerning above-mentioned subject. Please advise all Immigration Officer(sic) within your areas of jurisdiction that citizens of the countries listed in Appendix B1 are not to be issued Minister's permits and employment authorizations if it is determined that these persons also have permanent resident status in a country other than one of those listed in Appendix B1. Such persons are to be fast-tracked as per Annex B."
[4]
Further clarification was issued on July 21, 1986, as follows:
"FURTHER TO INSTRUCTIONS ISSUED PER OM 1E 123 RE THE FAST-TRACK, PLEASE ADVISE ALL IMMIGRATION OFFICERS WITHIN YOUR JURISDICTIONS THAT CITIZENS OF COUNTRIES LISTED ON APPENDIX B-1, WHO HAVE FOUND EFFECTIVE PROTECTION IN A COUNTRY NOT LISTED IN APPENDIX B-1, ARE NOT/NOT TO BE ISSUED MINISTER'S PERMITS. THESE PERSONS ARE TO BE CONVOKED FOR IMMEDIATE INQUIRY AND, TO THE DEGREE POSSIBLE, THEIR EXAMINATIONS UNDER OATH SHOULD BE SCHEDULED ON A PRIORITY BASIS.
"THE TEST OF EFFECTIVE PROTECTION IS NORMAL RECOGNITION: E.G. BY WAY OF ISSUANCE OF A REFUGEE OR NATIONAL TRAVEL DOCUMENT AND A REASONABLE DEGREE OF PERMANENCE."
[5]
For the applicant to succeed here, he must persuade me either that the policy creates a right in the applicant which is enforceable by way of mandamus, or that the respondents' duty to act fairly, which requires uniform application of policies of this nature, demands that this applicant be given the benefit of the twelve-month provision because it has been given to other applicants in similar circumstances.
[6]
As to the first branch of the argument, it appears that jurisprudence supports the opposite view. Unlike the provisions of the Immigration Act or Regulations, policies or programmes such as the one in ussue here do not create legal rights enforceable by way of mandamus. Recently, I had occasion to canvass these issues in FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[7]
As to the second branch of the argument, counsel contends that the failure to accord this applicant a twelve-month Minister's permit offends the duty to act fairly. The purpose of the adjournment for further submissions and argument was to address this issue. The point took on special significance because it occurred during the time that the Tamil refugees were picked up in lifeboats off the coast of Newfoundland and apparently were accorded the treatment which the applicant seeks in the present motion. Indeed, the respondents filed further evidence including the affidavit of Edward Donagher, Director General of the respondents' Operations Branch and in particular the following paragraph:
"4. When I issued the said permits, the information available to me was that the 154 Tamil refugee claimants had arrived in Canada on a ship from India and there was no evidence that they had obtained permanent residence status or effective protection in a country not listed in Appendix B-1 within the meaning of the aforesaid telexes dated June 13, 1986 and July 21, 1986."
During cross-examination on his affidavit on September 5, 1986, Mr. Donagher confirms that at the time of issuance of the permits to the Tamils, there was no evidence that they had obtained protection from either India or West Germany. The physical condition of the Tamils raised the suspicion that they had landed elsewhere before arrival in Canada, but there was no direct evidence of that fact. In the present case, the applicant's own affidavit confirms that upon his arrival the immigration officer was fully informed that he had not been a resident of the Peoples' Republic of China for six years, that he had been living in Guyana and that he had come to Canada with a stop in the Peoples' Republic of China en route for the purpose of including himself in the "twelve-month" policy. This disclosure by the applicant raises the obvious question of whether the interim residence in Guyana will lead to a determination that he is not a refugee, much less one who is entitled to the issuance of a permit under the policy. Indeed, the question is such an obvious one that it was the subject of the telex of June 13th to which I referred earlier, issued to assist all immigration officers in dealing with this very situation. It would have been inappropriate for the immigration officer to treat the applicant as a refugee or to take the responsibility for reaching the opposite conclusion. The course he followed defers that determination until further facts are established. It triggers an inquiry under s. 27(2), precisely the procedure set out in the Minister's telex.
[8]
The special twelve-month Minister's permit applies to a number of countries named in the policy circular. It constitutes a list of countries to which Canada will not deport. The effect of all of this is that under no circumstances is the applicant at risk of deportation to the Peoples' Republic of China because it is one of the countries on the list. Nothing has happened to prejudice his right to claim refugee status during the course of the inquiry and thereafter to have access to the refugee determination process as it was prior to the twelve-month special policy. I can scarcely conclude that, in itself, that constitutes unfair treatment. As that process unfolds, should the applicant establish the necessary facts to bring himself within the special twelve-month backlog policy, there is no reason to assume that he will be denied the Minister's permit.
[9]
The policy, however, does not create a right in the applicant which is enforceable by way of mandamus and in the application of it, I am not persuaded that this applicant has been treated unfairly.
[10]
The application must be dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]
