[3]
It is well established that it is not proper to give judgment under rule 341 unless the admission or document upon which it is based leaves nothing in controversy. If, for example, the legal result of the facts admitted is still in doubt or arguable then one should not give judgment under this rule. [See footnote 1]. In the present case I am not satisfied that the admissions go far enough, nor would they lead inevitably to the conclusion that the plaintiff was not the author of the literary work in question. The legal distinction which would appear to have to be addressed at trial was well set out by Farwell, J., in the Chancery Division in a case to which I was referred by counsel for the defendants, Donoghue v. Allied Newspapers Ltd. [See footnote 2, 3]:
"... A person may have a brilliant idea for a story, or for a picture, or for a play, and one which, so far as he is concerned, appears to be original, but, if he communicates that idea to an author or a playwright or an artist, the production which is the result of the communication of the idea to the author or the artist or the playwright is the copyright of the person who has clothed the idea in a form, whether by means of a picture, a play, or a book, and the owners of the idea has no rights in that product. On the other hand, this, I think, is equally plain, that, if an author employs a shorthandwriter to take down a story which the author is composing, word for word, in shorthand, and the shorthandwriter then transcribes it, and the author then has it published, the author and not the shorthandwriter is the owner of the copyright. A mere amanuensis does not, by taking down word for word the language of the author, become in any sense the owner of the copyright. That is the property of the author ..."
It is at least theoretically possible that the plaintiff had drafted much of the actual language employed in the script. To succeed, of course, the plaintiff will have to prove (as he appears to allege) that the language of the script, or important parts of it, was his own language used in his original draft that he himself wrote and sent to David Hurry. It would appear that he will have formidable difficulties in proving this, particularly since he is not able to produce a copy of the actual words he wrote nor does he seem to have a very good recollection of what he wrote. Nevertheless I think it must await the trial for a determination to be made as to how much he can prove and then as to whether such writing as he can prove would really, in law, constitute authorship of the script that was actually used. It should also be kept in mind that admissions made on examination for discovery are informal only and can be amplified or even contradicted by the plaintiff by further evidence in court.