[4]
The applicant's affidavit tells of the unfortunate events leading up to his rejection pursuant to s. 19(2)(a) (i) of the Immigration Act, 1976 as amended (hereinafter, the Act). Here are that affidavit's pertinent paragraphs:
"1. I am a citizen of the United Kingdom.
"2. I am married to Jozica Ruparel, a citizen of Yugoslavia.
"3. My wife and I have a son, Nicholai Ruparel, who is a citizen of the United Kingdom.
"4. I am a professional accountant and my wife is an executive secretary.
....
"8. On the advice of the Canadian High Commission, we contacted my brother, Sudhir Khimji Bhanji Ruparel, a citizen of Canada, who resides in Aurora, Ontario, and on January 19, 1988, my brother executed an Undertaking of Assistance (Assisted Relative Class) at the Toronto East Canada Immigration Centre on our behalf. Attached hereto, and marked as Exhibit 'C' to this my Affadivit is a true copy of the guarantor's copy of the Undertaking of Assistance.
"9. On or about January 4, 1988, at Great North Road, Barnet, Hertsfordshire, I was charged with the offence of driving a motor vehicle on a road after consuming so much alcohol that the proportion thereof in my breath exceeded the prescribed limit, contrary to s. 6 and schedule 4 to the British Road Traffic Act, 1972, as substituted by s. 25 and schedule 8 to the British Transport Act, 1981. Attached hereto, and marked as Exhibit 'D' to this my affidavit is a true copy of the charge record issued to me by the Barnet Metropolitan Police. Attached hereto, and marked as Exhibit 'E' to this my affidavit is a true copy of the test record issued to me by the Barnet Metropolitan Police on January 4, 1988, with respect to two specimens of breath provided by me, which results formed the subject matter of the drinking and driving charge referred to herein.
"10. The test result indicated that the first specimen of breath provided by me contained 57 milligrams [sic] of alcohol per 100 millilitres of breath and the second specimen of breath contained 56 milligrams [sic] of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath.
"11. On or about January 18, 1988, I attended the Barnet Magistrates Court, High Street Barnet, and pleaded guilty to the drinking and driving offence. I was sentenced to a fine of £ 225 sterling and my driver's licence was disqualified for one year.
"12. In or about March, 1988, my wife and I attended a visa interview at the Canadian High Commission in London.
"13. At the time of the interview, I disclosed the conviction referred to herein to the Visa Officer, F.J. Mark, Second Secretary.
"14. By letter dated March 21, 1988, a true copy of which is marked as Exhibit 'F' to this my affidavit, I  was advised by the Canadian High Commission in London that my application for Permanent Residence in Canada was refused because it has been determined that I am inadmissible to Canada because I am a person described in s. 19(2)(a)(i) of the Immigration Act, 1976.
"15. With the exception of the conviction for drinking and driving dated January 18, 1988, I have never been convicted of any crime of [sic - or] offence.
"16. In the evening of January 4, 1988, my last day of work in Canada Life Insurance Company of Potters Bar, U.K., I drank two and a half pints of beer with my colleagues from work. At aproximately 9 p.m., I was stopped by the police as I was driving home. I told the police, and later the court, that it was foolish to have driven after drinking. I am only an occasional drinker and I do not abuse alcohol."