[59]
The taxpayer raised the following other issues:
(a) Revenue Canada acted precipitously: Services MLM accountants were preparing a written reply to Mr. Roberge's letter of January 19, 1999 and Mr. Marengère says he believed that all matters raised by Revenue Canada were being discussed between professionals in the normal course;
(b) Mr. Marengère points to his cooperation and that of his lawyers in providing information to Revenue Canada related to personal director liability for amounts owed by various subsidiaries of Cedar Canada;
(c) Mr. Marengère focusses on Mr. Roberge's January 19, 1999 letter. He said this letter was only received by him after the deadline date for reply because he was hospitalized in Florida and Mr. Roberge did not return phone calls from the taxpayer's accountant. Furthermore, Mr. Marengère says Mr. Roberge's letter was not explicit in that if one of the issues concerning Revenue Canada was undeclared income, Revenue Canada should have said so. If time was of the essence, this should have been identified by Revenue Canada;
(d) Mr. Marengère says Revenue Canada's collection efforts were abusive. He mentions that a former officer of the Dominion Bridge Group collaborated with Revenue Canada in "helping Revenue Canada build its case against the Petitioner". Mr. Marengère says this individual was not trustworthy and is the subject of a criminal investigation.
(e) Mr. Marengère says the administrative seizures were illegal and excessive in that Revenue Canada had no justification for naming Wellgate as a "tax debtor" and if it had been the intention of Revenue Canada to do so, this should have been disclosed and explained to the court in the respondent's record. He adds that Wellgate is not even made a party to the proceedings by Revenue Canada;
(f) He says that on March 22, 1999, he was advised by his lawyer and believed that Justice Canada had indicated that because the administrative garnishments were in place, no further proceedings were presently envisaged by Revenue Canada. However, Mr. Marengère indicates that a further administrative proceeding did take place on March 24, 1999 when Ms. Dazé presented herself at Place Ville Marie Branch of the Royal Bank of Canada and required the immediate production of a large number of documents;
(g) He says the treatment he received from Revenue Canada is to be contrasted with the treatment Nicolas Matossian's company, Greyhorse Resources Canada Ltd. ("Greyhorse) received. Mr. Marengère says Greyhorse had an opportunity to reply to an equivalent Revenue Canada letter dated January 19, 1999 from Mr. Roberge and "has thus been spared the onslaught of Revenue Canada based on the production of misinformation to the Federal Court";
(h) Lastly, Mr. Marengère mentions that Ms. Dazé is a Collection Agent with Revenue Canada and an Inspector in the bankruptcies of Steen and DBI.