[72]
Based on this case law, there must be full and frank disclosure by the Minister, of known, relevant and material facts to obtaining the ex parte jeopardy collection order. Did the Minister meet the required disclosure standard. In my view, the Minister discharged his disclosure obligations for the following reasons:
(1) The applicant says Revenue Canada moved precipitously: it points to Mr. Roberge's January 19, 1999 demand for information letter; it explains the response delay in that Mr. Marengère was hospitalized for part of this period; it criticizes Mr. Roberge for allegedly not returning a telephone call on March 10, 1999 from the applicant's auditors from which the applicant concludes: "Had he returned the call, Mr. Roberge would have learned the reasons for the delay and would have had some explanation of the fact that, among others, the so-called 'undeclared income' was declared elsewhere". I find the applicant's criticisms misplaced: first, Revenue Canada did not know Mr. Marengère was hospitalized; second, Mr. Marengère admits that he met with his auditors on February 9th and was therefore aware of the February 10th deadline response; third, his auditors only contacted Mr. Roberge on March 10, 1999 and Mr. Roberge, in my view, explained why he could not immediately return the telephone call at that time.
(2) Services MLM points to the treatment given to Greyhorse. Whatever treatment Revenue Canada gave to Greyhorse is not, in my view, relevant to the merits of the ex parte jeopardy order rendered on March 15, 1999 and, after examining the affidavit of Mr. Matossian and his cross-examination, I find that it has even less relevance to this review proceeding.
(3) Services MLM is critical of the disclosure level concerning Wellgate and the failure by Ms. Dazé to describe the role Wellgate played in the financing of the Dominion Bridge Group starting in August 1997 and up to the April 1998 transaction although all of this information was public and was readily available to her. Services MLM's criticism in this respect goes to the depth or sufficiency of the required disclosure for an ex parte jeopardy collection order. I am satisfied that Revenue Canada, on March 15th, made a level of disclosure in sufficient detail and thoroughness as was required in the circumstances. The role of Wellgate in receiving the settlement funds assigned to it was well explained by Revenue Canada. Revenue Canada was not required, in my view, for these purposes, to delve into Wellgate's past role in financing the Dominion Bridge Group. Moreover, Revenue Canada was not in a position to know, until cross-examination on Mr. Marengère's affidavit in these proceedings, all of the intricacies involved. Those intricacies do not advance Services MLM's case in these review proceedings.
(4) Services MLM criticizes Ms. Dazé's affidavit because there is no indication that the taxpayer has depleted assets, transferred assets, wasted assets or made an attempt to defeat its creditors. For the reasons outlined above, the applicant misconstrues the proper legal test. Intent to deceive Revenue Canada is not part of the legal test; the Minister does not have to prove fraud or deceit or bad motive. As noted, it is the result or effect of the handling of the taxpayer's assets that is central to the issue at hand.
(5) I agree, however, with the applicant in terms of the description which Ms. Dazé gave concerning Services MLM's existing debt. In my view, Ms. Dazé should, before she swore her affidavit on March 12, 1999, have made a computer check to determine the status of the $21,000 tax debt. Her failure to do so is not, however, grounds for setting aside the jeopardy collection order: in terms of materiality, her statement of the existing tax debt of $21,000 pales and becomes insignificant in relation to the amounts assessed and reassessed against the applicant.
(6) The applicant says also missing from Ms. Dazé's affidavit is any suggestion that Services MLM has failed to file tax returns or is otherwise remiss in dealing with his obligations to the Minister. Again, in my view, that omission is not relevant; the applicant misstates the appropriate test for the granting of a jeopardy collection order.
(7) Applicant says Services MLM's cooperation with Revenue Canada's Toronto office should have been brought to light. This point has no bearing on the test for the issuance of the order being reviewed.