[73]
In another part of his written representations, the applicant again focusses on full and frank disclosure and says the court is entitled to rely on the Minister to bring all of the facts to light. Applicant says the Minister should have disclosed:
(a) The "undeclared income" was declared by other companies within the same group, "something Mr. Roberge would have learned if he had returned his phone calls". In my view, the Minister is not obligated to disclose matters not known by him;
(b) Applicant points to the Wellgate Note and says it was subject to a term and not payable until October 1999, something which has been ignored by Ms. Dazé and completely missed by Mr. Roberge. Again, what was disclosed to the court on March 15, 1999 was that Wellgate had filed proof of claim for the entire amount as a secured creditor in
BIA
proceedings and that the McConnell share transaction was to close imminently. Those facts which were disclosed and true were essential to the ex parte order.
(c) Services MLM says it is current in all respects concerning GST. In my view, the applicant's argument has partial validity although it shares some element of responsibility in the obscure manner of its reporting GST. However, the point really begs the question and does not materially affect Revenue Canada's position in terms of undeclared income;
(d) Services MLM says Ms. Dazé should have mentioned that she was an Inspector to the bankrupt estate of Dominion Bridge Company and suggests the court might have had some questions. I see no point to the applicant's criticism on grounds of relevancy;
(e) Société MLM is critical that Mr. Roberge chose not to describe for the court the basis of his assessment. He says the exhibits annexed are incomprehensible. Again, Services MLM's point is misplaced. As noted, the validity of the assessments must be accepted, at this stage, by this court;
(f) Lastly, applicant asserts the court should not be satisfied with Revenue Canada's "shotgun approach" to this matter and disclosure that can be described as haphazard at best. He says this court should insist on full disclosure of all of the facts. As noted, I am satisfied not only in connection with the ex parte jeopardy collection order but on this review, that the Minister has justified both factually and legally the ex parte order in addition to the fact the applicant has failed to meet its initial burden.