 [20] 
  One of the cornerstones of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act is the requirement that persons who wish to live permanently in Canada must, prior to their arrival in Canada, submit their application outside Canada and qualify for, and obtain, a permanent resident visa. Section 25 of the Act gives to the Minister the flexibility to approve deserving cases for processing within Canada. This is clearly meant to be an exceptional remedy, as is made clear by the wording of that provision: 
 
 
 
 25. (1) The Minister shall, upon request of a foreign national who is inadmissible or who does not meet the requirements of this Act, and may, on the Minister's own initiative, examine the circumstances concerning the foreign national and may grant the foreign national permanent resident status or an exemption from any applicable criteria or obligation of this Act if the Minister is of the opinion that it is justified by humanitarian and compassionate considerations relating to them, taking into account the best interests of a child directly affected, or by public policy considerations. 
 
 
 
 25. (1) Le ministre doit, sur demande d'un étranger interdit de territoire ou qui ne se conforme pas à la présente loi, et peut, de sa propre initiative, étudier le cas de cet étranger et peut lui octroyer le statut de résident permanent ou lever tout ou partie des critères et obligations applicables, s'il estime que des circonstances d'ordre humanitaire relatives à l'étranger - compte tenu de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant directement touché - ou l'intérêt public le justifient. 
 
 
 
 In assessing an application for landing from within Canada on Humanitarian and Compassionate grounds made pursuant to section 25, the Immigration Officer is provided with Ministerial guidelines. Immigration Manual IP5 - Immigration Applications in Canada made on Humanitarian or compassionate Grounds, a manual put out by the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Canada, provides guidelines on what is meant by Humanitarian and Compassionate grounds. It states, at paragraph 5.1: 
 
 
 
 5.1 Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds 
 
 
 
 Applicants bear the onus of satisfying the decision-maker that their personal circumstances are such that the hardship of having to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside of Canada would be: 
 
 
 
 (i) unusual and undeserved or 
 
 
 
 (ii) disproportionate. 
 
 
 
 Applicants may present whatever facts they believe are relevant. 
 
 
 
 5.1 Motifs d'ordre humanitaire 
 
 
 
 Il incombe au demandeur de prouver au décideur que son cas particulier est tel que la difficulté de devoir obtenir un visa de resident permanent de l'extérieur du Canada serait 
 
 
 
 (i) soit inhabituelle et injustifiée; 
 
 
 
 (ii) soit excessive. 
 
 
 
 Le demandeur peut exposer les faits qu'il juge pertinents, quels qu'ils soient. 
 
 
 
 The IP5 Manual goes on to define "unusual and undeserved" hardship and "disproportionate" hardship. It states, at paragraphs 6.7 and 6.8: 
 
 
 
 6.7 Unusual and undeserved hardship 
 
 
 
 Unusual and undeserved hardship is: 
 
 
 
 • the hardship (of having to apply for a permanent resident visa from outside of Canada) that the applicant would have to face should be, in most cases, unusual, in other words, a hardship not anticipated by the Act or Regulations; and 
 
 
 
 • the hardship (of having to apply for a permanent resident visa from outside of Canada) that the applicant would face should be, in most cases, the result of circumstances beyond the person's control 
 
 
 
 6.8 Disproportionate hardship 
 
 
 
 Humanitarian and compassionate grounds may exist in cases that would not meet the "unusual and undeserved" criteria but where the hardship (of having to apply for a permanent resident visa from outside of Canada) would have a disproportionate impact on the applicant due to their personal circumstances 
 
 
 