 [9] 
  With respect to hardship, the decision is written according to three separate subject headings:  
 Risk / Hardship Allegations 
 ;  
 Risk / Hardship Analysis 
 ; and  
 Establishment 
 . The  
 Risk / Hardship Allegations 
  section reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 The applicants have cited the same risk of retuning to Kenya as indicated in their refugee claim. In general the family fear the Mungiki sect and the state authorities in Kenya. The principal male applicant [father] is a member of the Kisii tribe and states that he and his family have been terrorized by members of the Kalenjin tribe and that police were unable to protect the family. As a result of the violence his farmed [sic] was burned, his livestock stolen, and ultimately his business was destroyed. The female principal applicant [mother] states that she was beaten and harassed due to her refusal to subject her daughters to female genital mutilation (FMG) and her views against this practice in Kenya. 
 
 
 
 The applicant's son states that he was accused of being Mungiki by police and has been pressured by to [sic] join this outlawed organization. 
 
 
 
 The applicant's daughter was brutally raped in 2003 and this was reported to police. She became pregnant as a result of the rape and while pregnant she was robbed at a pharmacy. 
 
 
 
 The family states that they will be destitute if returned to Kenya and that the family are [sic] emotionally attached to Canada. 
 
 
 
 (Decision, pp. 1-2) 
 
 
 
 The  
 Risk / Hardship Analysis 
  begins with this statement: 
 
 
 
 The applicants do not appear to have provided any documents as evidence in support of their risk of returning to Kenya although there has been a significant amount of documentation attesting to their establishment in Canada. 
 
 
 
 I have read and considered the applicant's statements regarding their risk in Kenya and the RPD's reasons for decision regarding their refugee claims in assessing risk in this case. I have also researched country conditions in Kenya using the most recent reliable and publicly accessible information available. 
 
 
 
 (Decision, p. 2) 
 
 
 
 The statement with respect to risk which centres on the availability of state protection is a cut and paste from the body of the PRRA decision but with the following conclusion: 
 
 
 
 After reviewing all the information provided to me and my own independent research,  
 I am of the opinion that the risks described by the applicants would not be sufficient as to constitute a hardship if they were to return to Kenya 
 .[Emphasis added] 
 
 
 
 (Decision, p. 2) 
 
 
 
 And the  
 Establishment 
  analysis reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 The applicants entered Canada less than three years ago and yet in that timeframe they have made considerable strides towards establishing themselves in Canada 
 
 
 
 I note that the principal applicants have  
 three children who continue to reside in Kenya 
 , with two of these children being even younger than the two children included in this application.  
 There has been no information provided by the applicants with regard to the situation in Kenya with respect to these children or why they did not accompany their parents to Canada 
 .  
 One can only assume that these children have established themselves in Kenya and were reluctant, or viewed it unnecessary to come to Canada. This lack of information tends to negate the hardship involved in the applicants returning to their home country 
 . 
 
 
 
 The principal applicants are both employed and have provided letters of reference from their employers and proof that they have endeavoured to upgrade their skills as community support workers. Their son is gainfully employed with UPS and is active in sports and other areas of the community. Their daughter is enrolled in a course of study to become a registered nurse and she is also employed, presumably to assist in the costs associated with her education. I note that the principal applicants are assisting her in the cost of her education and that they are paying full international fees to accomplish this. All members have exhibited a regular pattern of savings. 
 
 
 
 The applicant's have received a large amount of support from their Seventh-Day Adventist Church community, where they are all well-known and very active participants. 
 
 
 
 The applicants have demonstrated a very high level of establishment in Canada in a short period of time; however, while establishment is an important factor in assessing hardship it is not the only factor to be considered.  
 The industriousness of this family also tends to demonstrate a high level of ability to re-integrate back into Kenyan society, especially when considering the prospect of them being reunited with their remaining children on their return 
 . 
 
 
 
 [Emphasis added] 
 
 
 
 (Decision, p. 3)