[5]
Critically, Justice MacKay found that Mr. Oberlander, although not properly described as a "member" of the SS or SD, was not credible in his denial of membership in the unit to which he was specifically alleged to have been associated, Ek 10a:
"52. By Dr. Messerschmidt's testimony it was not possible for Mr. Oberlander to be a member of the SS, or of the Sicherheitspolizei, or of the SD. Only citizens of Germany, not Volksdeutsche as Mr. Oberlander was until 1944, could be members of the SS or its internal organizations. Even though they wore SD uniforms and were referred to as SS-men and were subject to SS police jurisdiction and control, indigenous interpreters drawn from ethnic German communities in the Ukraine were not members of the Sicherheitspolizei and SD. The term SS-Mann was apparently used generally as a description to include one who was a member of the SS in a formal sense or one who was not a member but an auxiliary, with the equivalent rank of private, serving with an SS unit.
"53. While he was not a member of the SS, or of its special security forces, the Sicherheitspolizei and SD, Mr. Oberlander was an interpreter, an auxiliary, serving the SD or others within a police unit, that is, Ek 10a, that was under the control of the SS. He says that he was not paid, but he was supplied a uniform by the summer of 1942, he lived, ate and travelled with the unit serving it and its members, even if that were by routine chores and as an interpreter. Whether he later served with other Einsatzkommando units, as was suggested from reference to his field post number appearing in the 1944 naturalization documents from Litzmannstadt, need not be determined. The evidence and his description of his role as an interpreter does not include any activity directly involved with Ek 10a's worst and most heinous operations. In his testimony Mr. Oberlander denied that he was ever a member of the SS, that he ever participated in execution of civilians or anyone, or that he assisted in such activity or that he was even present at executions or deportations. Yet Mr. Oberlander, by his testimony, acknowledges that he served as an interpreter with the SD, that the police unit was referred to as SD, and that after serving for some time he did know of its executions of civilians and others. He knew also its 're-settlement' practice for Jews, though he professes not to have understood the meaning of the latter as executions, until later, at Krasnodar. In all the circumstances, it is not plausible that he remained ignorant of the executions of Jews and others, as a major activity of the men with whom he served, until he was in Krasnodar.
"54. In my opinion, the circumstances preclude any conclusion other than that Mr. Oberlander was a member of Ek 10a in any reasonable interpretation of the word 'member' While there were formal requirements for membership in the SS, in the Sicherheitspolizei, and in the SD, there is no evidence of any such requirement for membership in Ek 10a, whether in its police elements or its auxiliaries, except selection to serve its purposes. Mr. Oberlander was selected, he served as an auxiliary with the unit and he lived and travelled with men of the unit. Its purposes he served, even if that service were not willingly given. Ek 10a, a police formation, was a unit under direction of the SS, from Berlin. Throughout his testimony he referred to the group he served with as 'the unit'. I find that while serving he belonged with the Ek 10a unit as a member. That is among allegations of the Minister in the Notice of Revocation and in the Summary of Facts and Evidence presented by the Minister in May 1995, which outlined the case upon which the notice was based." (Footnotes omitted)