[6]
Finally, Justice MacKay summarized his findings of fact as follows:
"Summary of findings of fact
"189. The respondent, Helmut Oberlander, was born at Halbstadt (a.k.a. Molochansk), Ukraine, on February 15, 1924. He and his family were Volksdeutsch whose forbears settled at Halbstadt some 250 years ago.
"190. In 1941, at 17 years of age, he had completed secondary school and he was fluent in German and Russian. In September or the beginning of October when German troops arrived at Halbstadt, he and his family were freed from a holding camp where they had been detained by Russians. He was later directed to assist in registration of Volksdeutsch in the area and to assist in repairing buildings and roads in the town.
"191. In October 1941, or as Mr. Oberlander states in February 1942, he was ordered by local authorities to report to German occupying forces to serve as an interpreter. He did so, he says, not voluntarily by free choice, but in fear of harm if he refused.
"192. He was assigned to Einsatzkommando 10a ('Ek 10a'), sometimes also known as Sonderkommando 10a, a German police unit of the Sicherheitspolizei (Sipo) and Sicherheitsdienst (SD). Both those organizations were security police forces of the Schutzstaffell (SS), which directed their operations from Berlin. The kommando unit included some members from other German police forces and a number of auxiliary personnel, including interpreters, drivers, and guards, from among Volksdeutsch or Russian prisoners of war.
"193. Ek 10a was one of the squads of Einsatzgruppe D ('EG D'), which in turn was one of four Einsatzgruppen, designated A, B, C and D. These were special police task forces operating behind the German army's front line in the eastern occupied territories in the years 1941-1944, to further the objectives of Nazi Germany. Among their roles they operated as mobile killing units and it is estimated that the Einsatzgruppen and the Security Police were responsible for the execution of more than two million people, mostly civilians, primarily Jews and communists, and also Gypsies, handicapped and others considered unacceptable for Nazi Germany's interests. The SS and the SD, largely because of their activities in eastern occupied territories, were declared to be criminal organizations in 1946, by decision of the International Military Tribunal and Article II of Control Council Law No. 10. In subsequent trials before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals in 1949 the former commander of EG D, Ohlendorf, was convicted of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and membership in a criminal organization, the SS.
"194. The respondent was not a member of the SD or Sipo, though he wore the uniform of the SD from the summer of 1942 until Ek 10a was merged with army units in late 1943 or 1944. In some documents of that era Mr. Oberlander is described as 'SS-mann', but that description and the uniform are not determinative of formal membership in the SD or the SS. German citizenship requirements precluded membership in the SD or Sipo.
"195. He was, however, a member of Ek 10a, as the applicant Minister alleged in the Notice of Revocation. He served as an auxiliary, as an interpreter for the SD, as he admits, from the time he was ordered to report until the remnants of that unit were absorbed in a regular army unit in late 1943 or 1944. He then continued, not as an interpreter, but as an infantryman.
"196. With Ek 10a he was moved through eastern Ukraine to Melitipol, Mariapol, and Taganrog, thence to Rostov and south to Krasnodar and Novorossiysk. There the unit, and the respondent, were engaged in anti-partisan missions, as they later were in the Crimea and in Belarus, and as he was, still later, in Poland and Yugoslavia.
"197. There is no evidence that the respondent participated in any of the atrocities committed against civilians by Ek 10a. His testimony that he did not know the name of the unit until 1970 is not credible, i.e., it is not worthy of belief, nor is his claim that he only came to know of Ek 10a action against Jews, that is, their 'resettlement', which he learned meant execution, when he was at Krasnodar and Novorossiysk in the fall of 1942.
"198. From Belarus, in late 1943 or early 1944, the respondent moved with German forces south to Poland where he was wounded. He became a naturalized German citizen, with his mother and his sister, at Litzmannstadt, in April 1944. From Poland later that year the army group he was then with moved to Yugoslavia and he was there engaged in anti-partisan activities. With Russian troops advancing he was moved to Torgau, a town south of Berlin, to assist in defence of the German capital. As the war was ending he and others moved west to surrender to American forces and then marched westward again, to Hannover, where he was in a British P.O.W. camp from May to July, 1945.
"199. He was released from that camp to be engaged in farm labour and on his release a certificate of discharge was completed indicating his discharge from the German army. Thereafter he continued to reside in then West Germany at Hannover and later at Korntal where he was reunited with his family, and where he and Mrs. Oberlander met and were married in 1950.
"200. Mr. Oberlander and his wife applied to be accepted as immigrants to Canada in April 1952. The application, completed by Mr. Oberlander, was made by completing an O.S.8 form which at that time included no specific request for information about activities of the applicant through the years of World War II.
"201. When they made application to immigrate there was an established process for considering applicants and I find that this was established at Karlsruhe, the centre for Canadian immigration in West Germany, at the times relevant for their application. That process required, after receipt of an application form, that there be security screening by an R.C.M.P. officer, medical examination by a doctor, and examination by a visa (immigration) officer to ensure that all requirements of the then applicable
Immigration Act
were met, including security screening, health requirements and the civil requirements and then current labour market categories for immigrants.
"202. Security screening in 1952-53 began with the security officer circulating to police and intelligence sources information drawn from the application of an individual, seeking any information available about the individual. When responses were received the applicant was invited to Karlsruhe to be interviewed, bringing designated documents, including x-rays, passport, and military discharge certificates.
"203. The established process provided that applicants appearing for interview would be first seen in a face to face interview by the security officer whose principal attention was directed to the background and experience of the applicant, his or her origin, former addresses, employment and military or other service over a decade and including the years of World War II. If that detail was not provided by the application form it would be sought at the interview, since the security officer's task was to assess whether or not the applicant should be rejected in accord with criteria established, originally by the R.C.M.P. and later modified by the Security Panel, a group of senior public servants, which coordinated security practices and provided support to a committee of Cabinet at Ottawa.
"204. At the conclusion of an interview the decision of the security officer was marked on the application file as 'passed' or 'not passed' stage B. If he had any doubt whether the applicant was among those who should be rejected the security officer rejected him or her, in the interests of Canada. That decision was final, not subject to review by a visa officer or anyone else. No reasons were given. The applicant was not informed of that decision. He or she was passed on for medical examination and then for interview by the visa officer, who alone advised the applicant whether or not he was considered to have met requirements for immigration, and, if not, no further explanation was offered that would reflect the security officer's decision.
"205. Only the visa officer could issue to successful applicants a visa for presentation to a port of entry officer in Canada, to be admitted for landing. Visa officers did not process a file, or interview an applicant until after the security officer had completed his assessment.
"206. I find Mr. Oberlander's evidence that he was not asked any questions about his wartime experience is not credible. Evidence of Mrs. Oberlander supportive of Mr. Oberlander on this key issue, I do not consider of any weight because it is not from an independent witness. Evidence of Mr. Bufe, that he was not asked about his wartime service at Karlsruhe in 1952, I do not consider of any weight since, in my view, it is not reliable.
"207. I find on the balance of probabilities that the established process at Karlsruhe for dealing with applicants for immigration to Canada was in operation on August 14, 1953 when Mr. and Mrs. Oberlander appeared for interview in relation to their application. I find that he was interviewed by a security officer and on the balance of probabilities he was asked questions about his background, including questions concerning his origin in the Ukraine, which was evident from his passport, how he came to Germany, his previous addresses and his military or other service in the war years, questions which were key to the security officer's decision.
"208. He was required to answer truthfully questions put to him. I find that if Mr. Oberlander had answered questions truthfully, including his experience as an interpreter with Ek 10a for the SD, an organization determined in 1946 to be criminal, his application would have been rejected, either because he would have been perceived to be a member of the SD, even if he were not, or because he would have been perceived as a collaborator. Either perception was a reason for rejection on security grounds. If the security officer had any doubt about whether he should be rejected Mr. Oberlander would have been rejected and he would not have passed stage B. That decision was not subject to review.
"209. That did not happen. He was not rejected, rather he was interviewed by a visa officer who approved his application, and later in February 1954 he was issued a visa. Using that he was admitted to Canada in May 1954 as a landed immigrant.
"210. I find no visa would have issued unless a security officer had indicated, following his interview with Mr. Oberlander that he had 'passed stage B', i.e. that he was cleared for security purposes. I find, on the balance of probabilities that clearance would only have issued if Mr. Oberlander misrepresented or did not disclose his wartime experience with Ek 10a. I find, on the balance of probabilities, that he falsely represented his background or knowingly concealed material circumstances when interviewed by a security officer. Thus, I find that thereafter he was admitted to Canada for permanent residence on the basis of the visa issued at Karlsruhe, and that admission was gained by false representation or knowingly concealing material circumstances.
"Conclusion
"211. This Court finds, on the balance of probabilities, weighing the evidence carefully, that the respondent Helmut Oberlander, was admitted to Canada for permanent residence in 1954 on the basis of a visa obtained by reason of false representation or by knowingly concealing material circumstances. Subsequently he was granted citizenship in 1960.
"212. I find that Mr. Oberlander was not lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence and thus he was not landed and did not thereafter acquire Canadian domicile, all pursuant to the
Immigration Act
as it applied when he came to Canada. Subsequently he obtained citizenship in 1960 when he prepresented, falsely, that he had acquired Canadian domicile. Thus he obtained Canadian citizenship by false representation." [Footnotes omitted]