[7]
As to the hypothetical situation where this application for judicial review would be converted into an action and Mr. Chrétien would be called as a witness, I can do no better than to refer to the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Flamborough v. National Energy Board, Interprovincial Pipe Line Ltd. and Canada
, [see footnote 4] wherein Mahoney, J., referred to the decision of the Supreme of Canada in
Committee for Justice and Liberty Foundation et al. v. National Energy Board et al.
: [see footnote 5]
"The test of whether a reasonable apprehension of bias exists is objective. It has been variously expressed but we do not think that it is any different whether the term 'reasonable apprehension' or 'reasonable suspicion' is used. The question here is whether a reasonably well informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically and having thought it through, would likely conclude that Mr. Stewart's prior relationship with Mr. Caughey would lead him to a biased appraisal of his evidence.
"A prior business association is not, per se, a basis upon which to find a reasonable apprehension of bias, even when it was an association with an organization having a direct interest in the matter to be decided, unless the tribunal member had been involved with the organization when it made its decisions regarding that matter. That was the dictum of the Supreme Court of Canada in the
Crowe
case. It follows that a prior business association with a witness in a business organization when none of them: tribunal member, witness or organization, had any interest whatsoever in the matter to be decided, cannot be accepted as a basis for a reasonable apprehension of bias on application of the objective test stated."
Obviously, my prior association in the Cabinet with Mr. Chrétien from 1968 to 1974 had no relation whatsoever with the
MAI
negotiations commenced in 1995. As a matter of fact I was not even aware of the existence of these negotiations until I opened the file.