[14]
The situation in the
Ponnusamy
decision above resembles to a certain extent the present matter. Unlike the
Stocking
decision which dealt with a request on the part of the Minister to amend the terms of the stay, in
Ponnusamy
the review of the stay had already been set out in a schedule of periodic review. Justice MacKay, at paragraphs 10 and 12, said the following regarding the periodic review of the stay:
"The decision to review the stay periodically was made when the stay was first entered and the Appeal Division set out a schedule of periodic reviews. I conclude that the applicant had sufficient notice that the oral hearing would concern itself with compliance with the terms of the stay of the deportation order. The applicant was served with a notice to appear. He had attended a number of these reviews in the past, and it is not conceivable that a reasonable person would not be aware of the purpose of the reviews. The applicant had notice, at least from the last extension of the stay in November, 1997, that the review was being held to consider whether he was in compliance with the conditions of the stay. In my opinion the Appeal Division acted within its authority under s-ss. 74(2) and (3) of the
Act
and in doing so it gave appropriate notice of the purpose of the review to be conducted.
. . . . .
"The applicant received notice of the oral review. Further, he was the subject of a stay with a number of conditions that he was required to follow. This was a periodic review and continuing the stay depended upon compliance with the conditions. At the hearing, the Board member gave the applicant further notice of the gravity of the situation and offered him the opportunity to make further submissions. Finally, even if I were persuaded that the applicant was not aware of the potential consequences of the review hearing that would merely acknowledge his ignorance of the law, which is no basis for the Court to intervene where the Appeal Board acted within its authority under s. 74 of the
Act
."