[49]
Janssen tendered the affidavit of seven expert witnesses, all of whom were cross-examined:
(a)
Frank A. Bucci
is an ophthalmologist specializing in ocular diseases including surgery of the eye. Dr. Bucci is the director of an eye surgery centre and has done thousands of surgical and other procedures related to the eye. Dr. Bucci has also lectured, given presentations and written extensively in the area of ophthalmology.
(b)
Alexander M. Klibanov
is a professor of Chemistry and Bioengineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He has researched, lectured and written extensively in the area of synthesis and evaluation of optically active compounds using enzymes.
(c)
Anne Langley
is Associate Librarian and Adjunct Associate Professor of Chemistry at the Duke University Chemistry Library. She has extensive experience in researching information using a variety of resources and has written books, articles and reports on a range of library and information science topics including electronic resources from the scientific and engineering perspective.
(d)
Dr. Allan S. Myerson
is the Provost and Senior Vice President and Philip Danforth Armour Professor of Engineering at the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago. He specializes in the area of crystallization and solubility and has written and taught extensively on the subject.
(e)
John J. Partridge
has worked for the past 37 years in organic chemistry dealing with pharmaceuticals. He has extensive experience in drug discovery and development in the area of anti-infectives, including in the areas of antivirals, antibacterials such as cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones as well as antifungals.
(f)
Dr. Joseph V. Rodricks
is a consultant in toxicology with focus in safety and human health risk assessment and a visiting professor at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, where he teaches courses in toxicology and risk analysis. He has lectured and written extensively in the area of toxicology.
(g)
Dr. Mark Philip Wentland
is a Professor of chemistry and organic chemistry at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institution, Troy, N.Y. Dr. Wentland specializes in quinolones, a class of compounds that include those at issue. He was active in quinolones in the 1980's, a period in which the subject matter of the '080 patent was developed. Dr. Wentland was actively working as a medicinal chemist in the quinolone area at the relevant time in the early 1980's.