 [4] 
  In giving reasons for confirming the officer's decision, the Appeal Division, after setting out the text of the refusal letter, summarized much of the evidence which the applicant gave to the Board. This related to the facts of her first marriage to her uncle, its annulment, the arranging of the second marriage and the circumstances surrounding that event. The Appeal Division identified conflicts between the evidence given to the immigration officer by the husband and evidence given to the Appeal Division by the applicant. The Appeal Division concluded: 
 
 
 
 "The evidence given by the appellant as to the circumstances surrounding her second marriage, their meeting, the discussions, the arrangements made by their parents, the engagement ceremony, the wedding are not remarkable in and of themselves. The situation only becomes questionable due to the substantial differences in the stories told during the hearing by the appellant and the answers to the questions given by the applicant in India to the visa officer. The appellant was not able to clear up these discrepancies. In fact, the responses that she gave merely detract more from her credibility. After considering the evidence of the appellant and the contradictions she made even within her own evidence, we find the appellant to completely lack credibility. We are not able to give any weight to any of the variety of stories told by the appellant. 
 
 
 
 "The applicant's attitude is discerned from the record appears to be that it is quite acceptable to enter into a marriage which could not be valid and intended to be a true marital relationship and be governed only by the desire of entering Canada. In other words the means justify the end. 
 
 
 
 "We are unable to say that the applicant has any intention to reside permanently with the appellant or that the marriage was entered into for any purpose other than to gain entry to Canada and, therefore, having found the appellant completely lacking credibility we find the refusal to be valid in law and, therefore, as the applicant is not a member of the family class the appeal is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction." 
 
