 [10] 
  One does not have to find a specific statement by the relevant spouse that there is no intention to reside permanently with the sponsoring spouse. Indeed, one would hardly expect to find such a statement. Inferences will usually be made in these cases from a number of aspects of the evidence. In this case the previously annulled marriage of the sponsoring spouse, a marriage between an uncle and a niece which had been entered into for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada, and the new husband's attitude to that marriage, was clearly a significant factor. Part of the evidence before the Appeal Division was the immigration officer's reasons for his decision. These state: 
 
 
 
 "Although the applicant stated that this was a traditionally arranged marriage he could not explain the apparent disregard of the proprieties of local custom and tradition, which would have allowed his parents to approve and consent to his marriage to the sponsor. Although the applicant lives in a small city and has a Master of Science degree, it is extremely unlikely that his parents would have abandoned long standing traditions and customs of the Punjab, and would have approved of his marriage to a woman who had been involved in an 'unthinkable' relationship with her maternal uncle. 
 
 
 
 "In cases where the marital partner and her family are unknown to the other party, no final decision to approve of the match is made until the groom's parents are fully briefed on the background and characteristics of the other family and the proposed bride. In view of the families lack of previous contact, the relatively short period between the initial introductions and the agreement to the match, and the apparent indifference with which Mr. Gandhi treated the sponsor's previous marital history, and his candor in the matter of the sponsor's own immigration and the subterfuge that had been required to obtain landing, led me to conclude that  
 the primary consideration 
  in this marriage with the sponsor,  
 is not to form a lasting marital relationship 
 , but rather an arrangement agreed upon by all parties to facilitate the admission to Canada of an otherwise inadmissible applicant." (underlining added) 
