[44]
Notwithstanding the different views of appropriate governance found in the evidence, and notwithstanding the conflicts in the evidence, after reviewing the record as a whole I believe the following general patterns are clear:
a. Although the Respondents seek to preserve the status quo at Nekaneet and claim to embody traditional custom and practice, they have, by and large, been unwilling to allow governance issues to be decided by the Nekaneet people themselves. They have simply resisted, and attempted to thwart, the new initiatives put forward by the Applicants. In the end, the rules of governance at Nekaneet should be decided by the First Nation and it is the will of the Nekaneet people as a whole that matters. The evidence suggests to me that the Respondents have been more concerned to preserve the status quo - and, in particular, the way the chief and band councils are elected and function - than with ascertaining what is the general consensus of the Nekaneet First Nation on appropriate rules of governance. Whatever irregularities arose in the referendum procedure and the general approach of the Applicants, it is at least apparent that their purpose has been to ascertain the will of the Nekaneet people. The new constitution and rules of governance bring no apparent personal advantage to the Applicants, while the Respondents, in their efforts to thwart consensus seeking, are tainted by a strong suggestion of self-interest regarding the control of communal lands and band resources. I think that a party or a group that thwarts attempts to ascertain the general consensus, and simply relies upon traditional custom and practice to justify its own position in a situation where governance has become dysfunctional, invites suspicion;
b. The Respondents have been clearly aware that community consensus is the true legitimizing factor because, in one very telling way, they have attempted to give themselves that legitimacy. At the second election organized by the Respondents under the Second Band Custom a petition was signed by 113 persons which had the following written above the signatures:
"I believe and trust in the Nekaneet Election Procedure of March 28, 2008. Nekaneet Elections have chosen their spokes persons [Band Council members] under the Band Custom process since elections were used on Nekaneet."
The petition is attached to the affidavit of Mr. Dale Mosquito and the only explanation he offers for it is as follows:
"At the time of the conduct of the custom election at Nekaneet, band members were also given the opportunity to sign a petition confirming their commitment to our band custom process. This document was signed by 113 band members. One of the Applicants, Christine Mosquito, and a person who had worked on the Governance Committee, Doreen Oakes, signed this petition. A copy of the petition is attached hereto and marked as Exhibit 'G' to this my affidavit."
There is no evidence that it has been Nekaneet custom to have members sign such petitions at election time, and such a petition can only be understood in the context of this dispute. There would be no need to have people sign such a petition unless the Respondents wanted to use it to dispute the legitimacy of the Referendum Vote and the earlier election which took place under the Referendum Band Custom. The petition is the Respondents' attempt to demonstrate community support for the status quo which they profess to embody. It is their answer to the Applicants' Referendum Vote.
The strange thing about this is that the criticisms that the Respondents level against the Applicants' Referendum Vote to try and demonstrate that it did not yield a consensus of the Nekaneet First Nation in favour of the new regime are, in fact, true of the petition. There is no evidence to reassure the Court that this petition has any value or legitimacy as an expression of the understanding or the will of the people who signed it. What was the procedure for signing it? What was the information and educative process that preceded it? What were the safegrounds surrounding the signing? Who authorized it? Who organized it? What means did they use to secure the signatures or to ensure that the signators voted freely in accordance with their consciences? We know most of these things about the Referendum Vote. We know none of them about the petition.
The Respondents take a strong position in this application that the Nekaneet First Nation did not understand what was at stake under the Referendum Vote. They say the Nekaneet people were not properly informed and that the Referendum Vote was unsafe because of mistakes in the process. They appear to feel no obligation to reassure and demonstrate to the Court that the petition has the legitimacy that they say the Referendum Vote lacks. But without those reassurances, there is little weight that the Court can attach to the petition as an expression of the will of the Nekaneet First Nation.
What is more, the very existence of such a petition undermines some of the basic tenets of the Respondents' position. They say that the governance issues that led to the Referendum Vote were little understood at Nekaneet. Yet they present the Court with a countervailing petition that can only have a significance and a meaning in the context of the governance debate. If these people do not understand what is at stake, why would they be signing a petition so obviously intended to counter the Referendum Vote and the first election? The Court cannot accept that the people who signed the petition understood its significance and what was at stake while the people who participated in the Referendum Vote were not sufficiently informed to know what they were doing. The petition is strong evidence of the Applicants' position that the governance issues at stake in the Referendum Vote were widely known and debated in the Nekaneet community;
c. The governance debate at Nekaneet is between those who wish to preserve a status quo that has led to significant problems for the community as a whole. The Respondents insist that all band council initiatives require a consensus of council members. The problem with this is that it can only work where no self-interest enters into the picture. Any band council business that threatens the personal, family or friendship interests of a councillor can be thwarted by absenteeism and/or veto. The evidence reveals ongoing dysfunction at the band council level in recent years that has led to warnings from Nekaneet's auditors and INAC. Tradition and custom have been summoned by the Respondents' group to justify a traditional consensual approach, but it is obvious from the evidence that self-interest has sullied custom and that if a new approach to governance is not found, those who control communal assets may continue to prosper at the expense of the Nekaneet First Nation as a whole. There is a great deal of personal bitterness in the evidence and the somewhat extreme measures used by the Respondents to boycott, thwart and nullify the referendum process, rather than seek the consensus of the Nekaneet community as a whole, suggest that some individuals at least have much to lose from the new governance regime. There is evidence of nepotism on the Applicants' side too, but the Applicants are not seeking to extend the opportunities for personal and family gain. The new constitution will pinch them just as much as the Respondents and will make both groups much more accountable to the Nekaneet membership;
d. I have carefully reviewed the affidavits provided by both sides. While there is considerable contradiction on some key points, it is clear that the affidavits of Ms. Pahtayken, Ms. Millar and Mr. Buffalo Calf for the Applicants are, for the most, fact-based and present evidence within their personal knowledge. Their affidavits are also supported by solid documentation that addresses the key issues in this dispute. The affidavits of Mr. Wenaas and Mr. Alger for the Applicants come from experienced and impartial observers and participants and are strongly supportive of the Applicants' position. The affidavits from the Respondents speak well and convincingly of tradition and custom at Nekaneet, and of the special history of the Nekaneet people. But they are much less convincing when it comes to the key issues in this application. Apart from defending personal positions, they are very thin on acceptable evidence concerning the referendum process, and the knowledge of the community as to what was at stake. There is considerable resort to hearsay, vagueness and personal opinion on key points. As an example, when I examine the affidavit of Mr. Dale Mosquito, for Respondents, it is evident that Mr. Mosquito does speak to some matters of personal experience, but much of what he says is generalized opinion or argument, often on points that are not relevant to the central issue of concern in this application. In addition, when he does get down to the principal issues, Mr. Mosquito reveals a lack of objectivity. He is willing to opine to things of which he has no personal knowledge in order to discredit the Applicants and bolster the Respondents case:
"40. Members of the Governance Committee travelled to various locations both in Canada and the United States to meet with some band members on an individual basis. I am advised by Santana and Belinda Stanley, by two of my sisters-in-law, that they were approached to vote by Harry Buffalo Calf and Cheryl Stanley. One of the two did cast a ballot when she agreed to vote in favour of what the Governance Committee was proposing. When the second individual indicated she was not in favour, these individuals would not take her ballot. I am advised however that the persons picking up the ballots did not discuss specifics of what members were being asked to vote on. This does not appear to be an isolated occurrence. I have been advised by other band members that members of the so-called Governance Committee or those working with them, visited members in several locations.
"41. I have spoken to one member of the Nekaneet First Nation who indicated to me that he voted in favour but did not understand what he was voting for."