[71]
A helpful account of what amounts to being sufficiently informed is found in
McLeod Lake Indian Band v. Chingee
, supra. There, the terms of the McLeod Lake Indian Band's band custom were purportedly adopted at a general meeting of the band convened with notice. An election was subsequently held in accordance with those terms. The defendants argued that the election was invalid because the terms adopted at the meeting did not actually reflect band custom. In considering this argument, Justice Reed made the following observations at paragraphs 18 and 19:
"18. The question that remains is whether 'broad general consensus' equates to a 'majority decision of the Band members attending a general meeting of the Band convened with notice'. In my view, it may do so, or it may not, depending upon a number of factors. If for example, the general meeting was held in a location or at a time when it was difficult for a number of members to attend, and there was no provision for proxy voting, it may not meet the broad consensus test. If the notice was not adequate in not providing sufficient detail of what was proposed, or was not given sufficiently in advance of the meeting to allow people a realistic opportunity to attend then it would not be.
"19. There are also situations in which those who do not vote may be signaling a willingness to abide by the majority decision of those who do. I am of the view that approval by a majority of the adult members of the Band is probably a safe indication of a broad consensus (the age of majority being a matter for the band to determine). Whether a majority decision by the Band members attending a general meeting demonstrates a broad consensus depends on the circumstances of that meeting."
Madam Justice Reed's statement, which has been quoted in a number of subsequent judgments, confirms that whether information provided is sufficient will depend on the circumstances. If the information documents sent to the membership of Nekaneet provided "sufficient detail of what was proposed," and the information meetings were held at a relatively convenient time and place, with reasonable notice having been given, then it can likely be said that the membership was sufficiently informed.