[23]
The standard of review on appeals from decisions of trademark officers who con­sider issues of "confusion" and "dis­tinctiveness" has often been considered by this court. The statutory right of appeal is unlimited. [see footnote 28] Additional evidence may be adduced on appeal. [see footnote 29] In
Labatt Brewing Co. v. Molson Breweries, A Partnership
, [see footnote 30] Justice Heald reviewed the role of this court in determining a trademark appeal:
"The role of the court on an appeal pur­suant to s. 56 of the
Act
was aptly stated by Justice Strayer in
McDonald's Corp.
v.
Silcorp Ltd.
(1989), 24 C.P.R.(3d) 207 (F.C.T.D.) at page 210; affirmed 139 N.R. 319, 41 C.P.R.(3d) 67 (F.C.A.):
'It seems clear that in opposition pro­ceedings where the issue is essentially one of fact concerning confusion or distinctiveness the decision of the regis­trar or the Board represents a finding of fact and not the exercise of discretion. Therefore the court should not impose upon itself the same degree of restraint, in reviewing that decision, as it would if the decision were essentially an exercise of discretion. It is thus free to review the facts to determine whether the decision of the registrar or Board was correct, but that decision should not be set aside lightly considering the expertise of those who regularly make such determinations: see
Benson & Hedges (Canada) Ltd.
v.
St. Regis Tobacco Corp.
(1968), 57 C.P.R. 1 at p. 8, 1 D.L.R.(3d) 462, [1969] S.C.R. 192, at pp. 199-200. While different panels of the Federal Court of Appeal have variously expressed the duty of this court on appeal to be to determine whether the registrar has "clearly erred", or whether he has simply "gone wrong", it appears that it is the duty of a judge sitting on an appeal such as this to come to his own conclusion as to the cor­rectness of the finding of the registrar. In doing that he must, however, take into account
the special experience and knowledge
of the registrar or the Board, and more importantly have regard to whether new evidence has been put before him that was not before the Board.'" [see footnote 31] (Emphasis added)
It is interesting to note the reference to the standard of correctness, while at the same time acknowledging the special experience and knowledge of the trademark hearing officer.