 [19] 
  A final factor considered in the establishment section requires comment. The Visa Officer cited from the decision in  
 Mahin Davoudifar 
  to make the point that a simple plea from a deserving and valued member of the community who is in Canada with no status is not sufficient qualification to allow him or her to remain in Canada. The point made is intended to apply to the applicants. In my opinion, given the circumstances that the applicants present, this is an unfair standard to apply to them. For example, the following is the mother's plea to be allowed to stay on humanitarian and compassionate grounds: 
 
 
 
 Having applied for refugee status and was refused, I will not be permitted to travel outside the country to apply for permanent residence visa for Canada and be allowed re-entry. So I am extremely fearful of going out of Canada as required by the law and Canada is the only country I can submit my application from within. I am extremely fearful to what will happen to me if returned to my country. I will only become a destitute having no home to go after loosing all I possessed on earth. My home was burnt, land grabed [sic] and family business burnt to ashes by my enemies in my own country, who wanted to kill me and my family. I became a refugee in my own country. My relatives contributed greatly to my sufferings by excommunicating me from the community after refusing my daughters not to go through FGM and thus they cannot provide or assist me and my family. Canada is the only country I have come to know that has a good record and respect on Human Rights. Canada has provided homage and protection to myself and my family. Emotionally and socially I am oriented and attached to Canadians who have become my brethren in all aspects of life. Economically I am stable and if returned back home, there is none, not one person who will provide for me and my husband in terms of daily living, after being on the run for many years and especially the last past 4 (four) years. 
 
 
 
 Therefore it is my sincere plea to be given a chance to submit my application from within. 
 
 
 
 (Supplementary Information of Christne Moraa, H&C Tribunal Record, p. 99) 
 
 
 
 By virtue of this statement, not only is the mental state of the daughter in issue because of the sexual assault she suffered, but the mental state of the mother is in issue as well. The Visa Officer failed to come to grips with this evidence.