[27]
Of particular significance in relation to the judgment here rendered is the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in
Haig and Birch v. Canada et al.
(1992), 57 O.A.C. 272; 9 O.R.(3d) 495 (C.A.), decided August 6, 1992. That case concerned the application of the same interim policy of the Canadian Armed Forces as in issue in the action of Ms. Douglas. There the motions judge had allowed an application and granted a declaration that the "absence of sexual orientation from the list or proscribed grounds of discrimination in s. 3(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
is discriminatory as being contrary to the guarantee of equal benefit of the law set out in s. 15 of the
Charter
" (
Haig v. Canada
(1991), 5 O.R. (3d) 245 at 248 (Gen. Div.) per McDonald, J.). On appeal, counsel for the Crown conceded that sexual orientation is an analogous ground to those expressly set out in s. 15(1) of the
Charter
. The Court of Appeal held that the omission of sexual orientation as a proscribed ground of discrimination under s. 3(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, and the resulting failure to provide an avenue for redress, with the possible inference from the omission that discriminatory treatment based on sexual orientation is acceptable, created and effect of discrimination contrary to s. 15(1) of the
Charter
. The Crown disavowed reliance on s. 1 of the
Charter
to support the
Human Rights Act
as enacted. In light of
Schachter v. Canada
(1992), 139 N.R. 1; 10 C.R.R.(2d) 1 (S.C.C.) the Court of Appeal found that the appropriate remedy was reading in, which it directed by a declaration that the
Act
be interpreted and applied as though it included sexual orientation as a proscribed ground of discrimination. In effect the Ontario Court of Appeal reached a result that the Federal Court of Appeal declined to reach in
Mossop
, supra, and Muldoon, J., declined to reach in
Neilsen
, supra. While I have noted that the same policy of the Canadian Armed Forces in question in
Haig
is the basis of the action by Ms. Douglas, the issues in
Haig
concerned the
Canadian Human Rights Act
which was not raised by the pleadings in this case.