[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant, a citizen of Costa Rica, seeks judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) dated March 9, 1994, that she is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The issues are her right to counsel, her right to an interpreter, her right to present her case, family unity and whether the Board erred in assessing her objective fear.
[3]
The applicant was not represented by counsel at her hearing. She claimed in an affidavit submitted to the court that she had not yet been accepted by legal aid, and informed the Board at a prehearing conference of this fact. However, she has been in Canada since April 21, 1989 and expressed an intention on April 23, 1989 to make a refugee claim. Her hearing before the Board was originally scheduled May 23, 1993, then rescheduled August 31, 1993, and was finally heard December 15, 1993. There is no explanation for her delay in seeking legal aid. More importantly, she was informed of her legal right to counsel, and was asked at the hearing if she was prepared to proceed without counsel. She then testified that she was prepared to proceed without counsel. Under these circumstances there has been no deprivation of a right to counsel.
[4]
The most difficult issue in this case is the right to an interpreter. The applicant did not request an interpreter in her Personal Information Form (PIF) dated September 17, 1993. She asked for a hearing in English. She filled in Spanish as "interpreter language" in a form during her interview to refer her case to the Board, but the PIF was completed subsequent to that date.
[5]
Under these circumstances it is clear that the Board had no obligation to supply an interpreter at the commencement of the hearing. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[6]
The Board has an ongoing obligation during the hearing to ensure that an applicant does not require an interpreter. There are examples in the transcript of instances where the applicant appears to have trouble in understanding the questions, however, the Board pursued these matters until it was satisfied that she properly understood them. At no stage during the hearing did the applicant state that she was having problems with English. The first time the question is raised is in her affidavit in support of her application for judicial review. There are also contradictions between the affidavits of the refugee hearing officer (RHO), who is Spanish speaking, and the applicant. In telephone conversations and meetings outside the hearing the applicant sometimes spoke English and sometimes spoke Spanish. The applicant states the RHO was not satisfactory in Spanish while the RHO states that she spoke Spanish at home and was fluent. While the applicant's first language is Spanish the applicant had been attending an English school for three and one-half years - grades 9 to 12. If the applicant had given any indication on the record of wanting an interpreter there would have been reversible error, but the Board and the RHO were never informed that the applicant had any problems. The applicant also did not set out any evidence which she might have given had an interpreter been available, nor did she correct any of her evidence given at the hearing.
[7]
The third issue involves the applicant's right to present her case. The applicant wanted her stepfather to testify with respect to her objective fear since her claim is based on his experiences. His experiences were set out in the applicant's PIF, and were therefore on the record before the Board. The stepfather left Costa Rica before the specific incidents of persecution occurred involving the applicant. While the Board was interested in obtaining further information on the agents of her persecution, he was not in the country at the time and his evidence could not assist in their identification. The Board asked the applicant if her stepfather could add anything to what was already before it, and she agreed he could not. Her fears can only be described by her or someone else present in Costa Rica at that time. The stepfather did not fall within this category. The Board did not take issue with the applicant's credibility. The Board was not deprived of any relevant evidence.
[8]
The fourth issue relates to family unity as set out in the
United Nations Convention Refugee Handbook
. Firstly, this is not law in Canada. Secondly, her stepfather was never granted Convention refugee status. Contrary to the Board's statement, the documentary evidence indicated he was landed as an immigrant under the backlog regulations. He had a credibility basis hearing. In refugee law she must show a well-founded fear of persecution except where a dependent's claim is based on the parents' fear. This applicant came to Canada separately from her mother and stepfather and neither of the latter were declared a Convention refugee. The applicant may well have good grounds for humanitarian and compassionate grounds to obtain landed immigrant status, but that does not make her a Convention refugee.
[9]
The fifth issue relates to a well-founded fear of persecution. The Board stated at page 5 of its reasons:
"The claimant provided her oral testimony in a straight-forward manner and responded to questions similarly. Based upon the PIF responses, including the narrative of the claimant's stepfather, the panel would have difficulty in finding a subjective basis for a fear of persecution for the claimant herself. The panel did not question the stepfather about his testimony. But the claimant did provide documentary evidence showing that her stepfather had been accepted as a Convention refugee in Canada. As a result, the panel decided to allow the claimant the benefit of the doubt that she held a subjective fear, as testified. However, the panel is not satisfied that there is an objectively valid basis for the claimant's fears." (footnote omitted)
[10]
The persecutors were only interested in her stepfather. She was threatened but no physical harm was done to her. For five years unknown persons approached members of her family but again these people were looking for her stepfather.
[11]
The Board found she had access to state protection. The police set up surveillance to look for the men approaching her. The applicant testified the police were annoyed at her because the men were never there after the police arrived.
[12]
However, the Board also noted there were other state forces available to assist her. The Board stated Costa Rica was one of the most democratic countries south of the Rio Grande. It was open to the Board on the evidence to find she did not have a well-founded fear of persecution.
[13]
I refused to certify a question on family unity as to whether it only applies to Convention refugees. It is a matter of policy, and furthermore the
United Nations Convention Refugee Handbook
is only intended to apply to Convention refugees. The stepfather and mother are not Convention refugees. The facts of each case must be examined.
[14]
The application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/gms
[End of document]
