 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etienne v. Can. (M.C.I.) (2014), 465 F.T.R. 72 (FC) 
 
 
 
 MLB headnote and full text 
 
 
 
 [French language version follows English language version] 
 
 
 
 [La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise] 
 
 
 
 ......................... 
 
 
 
 Temp. Cite: [2014] F.T.R. TBEd. OC.011 
 
 
 
 Jeany Etienne, Rose Annette Etienne, Hannah Etienne, Judith Etienne and Simeon Jean Etienne (applicants) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent) 
 
 (IMM-6169-13; 2014 FC 937; 2014 CF 937) 
 
 
 
 Indexed As: Etienne v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 
 
 
 Federal Court 
 
 Rennie, J. 
 
 October 6, 2014. 
 
 
 
 Summary: 
 
 A Senior Immigration Officer refused the applicants' application for permanent residence from within Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds under s. 25(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act. The applicants applied for judicial review. 
 
 
 
 The Federal Court allowed the application and referred the matter back to Citizenship and Immigration Canada for reconsideration by a different officer of the Backlog Reduction Office. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 4 
 
 Definitions and general principles - Children - [See  
 Aliens - Topic 1206 
 ]. 
 
 
 
 Aliens - Topic 1206 
 
 Admission - Immigrants - General - Upon compassionate or humanitarian grounds - The applicants applied for judicial review of the refusal of their application for permanent residence from within Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds - The applicants were a couple and their three children aged 15, 13 and 10 - They were all British Overseas Territories (BOT) citizens - The principal applicant and his wife were born in Haiti, but lost Haitian citizenship upon acquiring BOT citizenship while living in Turks and Caicos - All the applicants alleged that they were subject to racial discrimination in Turks and Caicos due to their Haitian background - The youngest child (Simeon) was subjected to physical and emotional abuse by his former teacher in Turks and Caicos - As a result, Simeon developed a heart murmur and post-traumatic stress disorder - The Federal Court held that the Immigration Officer incorrectly elevated the test for the best interests of the child and applied an incorrect hardship test - The court referred the matter back for reconsideration by a different officer. 
 
 
 
 Cases Noticed: 
 
 Judnarine v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2013), 425 F.T.R. 312; 2013 FC 82, refd to. [para. 6]. 
 
 Joseph et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2013), 440 F.T.R. 36; 2013 FC 993, refd to. [para. 6]. 
 
 New Brunswick (Board of Management) v. Dunsmuir, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190; 372 N.R. 1; 329 N.B.R.(2d) 1; 844 A.P.R. 1; 2008 SCC 9, refd to. [para. 9]. 
 
 Hawthorne v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2003] 2 F.C. 555; 297 N.R. 187; 2002 FCA 475, refd to. [para. 8]. 
 
 Singh Sahota v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2011] F.T.R. Uned. 445; 2011 FC 739, refd to. [para. 8]. 
 
 Beharry et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (2011), 383 F.T.R. 157; 2011 FC 110, refd to. [para. 8]. 
 
 Bustamante Ruiz et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2009] F.T.R. Uned. 744; 2009 FC 1175, refd to. [para. 8]. 
 
 
 
 Counsel: 
 
 Arghavan Gerami, for the applicants; 
 
 Aileen Jones, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 Solicitors of Record: 
 
 Gerami Law Professional Corporation, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicants; 
 
 William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent. 
 
 
 
 This case was heard at Ottawa, Ontario, on September 2, 2014, by Rennie, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following decision on October 6, 2014. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 I. Overview 
 
 
 
 [1] 
   
 Rennie, J. 
 : The applicants seek to set aside of a decision of a Senior Immigration Officer (the Officer), dated August 30, 2013, refusing their application for permanent residence from within Canada on humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) grounds pursuant to subsection 25(1) of the  
 Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 , SC 2001, c 27 ( 
 IRPA 
 ). For the reasons that follow, the application is granted. 
 
 
 
 II. Background 
 
 
 
 [2] 
  The applicants are Mr. Jeany Etienne, Mrs. Rose Annette Etienne, and their children Hanna (15 yrs), Judith (13 yrs), and Simeon (10 yrs). They are all British Overseas Territories (BOT) citizens. The principal applicant and his wife were born in Haiti, but lost Haitian citizenship upon acquisition of BOT citizenship while living in Turks and Caicos. 
 
 
 
 [3] 
  All applicants allege they were subject to racial discrimination in Turks and Caicos due to their Haitian background. Most relevant to this judicial review is that, the youngest child, Simeon was subjected to physical and emotional abuse by his former teacher in Turks and Caicos. As a result of this abuse, Simeon developed a heart murmur and post-traumatic stress disorder. Dr. David Palframan of the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario commented on the post-traumatic stress disorder in a letter dated October 18, 2012, which reads: 
 
 
 
 In my professional opinion, although he is functioning reasonably well in Canada, a return to the Turks and Caicos islands would precipitate a significant worsening of his posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms which are caused by his abusive treatment at his former address. I am very much hoping that an appropriate decision can be made to deal with this matter in such a way as to not significantly worse his health, which a return to the Turks and Caicos would surely do. 
 
 
 
 [4] 
  The applicants entered Canada in 2010 and filed a refugee claim. It was denied by the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) on September 4, 2012. Concurrently, on June 20, 2012, the applicants requested that their application for permanent residence be considered on H&C grounds pursuant to subsection 25(1) of the  
 IRPA 
 . The H&C application was rejected by the Officer who found that the applicants had not established that they would face unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship if they were required to return to Turks and Caicos. 
 
 
 
 [5] 
  In particular, the Officer concluded that requiring Simeon to return to Turks and Caicos, with his family, would not negatively affect his best interests. The Officer further determined that the applicants' level of establishment in Canada did not merit special consideration that warranted an exemption from the  
 IRPA 
 . 
 
 
 
 III. Analysis 
 
 
 
 A.  
 The Standard of Review 
 
 
 
 [6] 
  The choice of the proper legal test in assessing the best interests of the child is a question of law reviewable on the correctness standard:  
 Judnarine v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2013 FC 82 at para 15;  
 Joseph v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2013 FC 993 at para 12. When applying the correctness standard, the reviewing court "will not show deference to the decision maker's reasoning process; it will rather undertake its own analysis of the question":  
 Dunsmuir 
   
 v New Brunswick 
 , 2008 SCC 9 at para 50. 
 
 
 
 B.  
 The Officer Applied an Incorrect Best Interest of the Child Test 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  This case turns on whether or not the Officer imported an elevated hardship test into his analysis of the best interests of the child, and whether the Officer was "alert, alive and sensitive" to the child's best interests. That is, whether or not the Officer applied the incorrect legal test in analyzing the best interests of the child. 
 
 
 
 [8] 
  The jurisprudence is clear that it is incorrect to import an elevated hardship test into the best interests of the child analysis:  
 Hawthorne v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2002 FCA 475 at para 9;  
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED  
 Beharry v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2011 FC 110. The unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship test has no place in the best interests analysis:  
 Beharry 
  at para 11. As noted in  
 Hawthorne 
 , at para 9, "children will rarely, if ever, be deserving of any hardship". However, the mere use of the words "undue or undeserved hardship" or similar language does not constitute a reversible error:  
 Bustamante Ruiz v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration 
 , 2009 FC 1175 at paras 27-28. This Court must examine the substance of an Officer's analysis to determine whether an incorrect hardship test was applied. The substance of an officer's analysis must prevail over the form:  
 Hawthorne 
  at para 3. 
 
 
 
 [9] 
  The Officer, in substance, incorrectly elevated the test for the best interests of the child. Although the Officer did not use the specific language of "unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship" in his best interests analysis, it is clear from reading the decision as a whole that the Officer was on a search for undeserved or disproportionate hardship. Further, the Officer did not turn his mind to identifying the best interests of the child. It is well-established that an officer must be "alert, alive and sensitive" to the interests of the child:  
 Baker 
  at para 75. In order for an officer to be properly "alert, alive and sensitive" to a child's best interests, the officer should have regard to the child's circumstances, from the child's perspective. 
 
 
 
 [10] 
  The Officer in the present case did not have regard to Simeon's circumstances, nor did he at any point in his decision determine what would be in the child's best interests. Instead, the Officer stated that "despite some emotional difficulty, there is little evidence to suggest that [Simeon] would probably return to potentially harmful conditions in Turks and Caicos ...". This framing suggests that the Officer was not looking to what was in the child's best interests; rather, the Officer was requiring evidence that Simeon would face more than "some" emotional difficulty if returned to Turks and Caicos. That is, the Officer required that Simeon face a significant degree of emotional difficulty - or, that he face a disproportionate level of hardship. 
 
 
 
 [11] 
  Further, the Officer imported an elevated hardship test into the best interests analysis by requiring evidence that "Simeon's health and well-being would be severely compromised" upon a return to Turks and Caicos. Requiring evidence of severe harm or hardship to a child is incorrect in the context the analysis of the best interests of a child. The question is not: "is the child suffering enough that his 'best interests' are not being met?" As the Officer applied an elevated hardship test and did not have regard to the child's best interests, the Officer's analysis of the best interests of the child was incorrect and this application is granted. 
 
 
 
 [12] 
  In view of my conclusion on this issue it is not necessary to address the issue of the family's level of establishment. 
 
 
 
 JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 [13] 
   
 THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that 
 : 
 
 
 
 1. The style of cause as on the application for leave be amended so as to add the name of Simeon Jean Etienne as an applicant; 
 
 
 
 2. The application for judicial review is granted and the matter is referred back to Citizenship and Immigration Canada for reconsideration by a different officer of the Backlog Reduction Office; and 
 
 
 
 3. There is no question for certification. 
 
 
 
 Application allowed. 
 
 
 
 Editor: Jana A. Andersen/vnh 
 
 
 

