[12]
In order to determine the proper construction of s. 6(7) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, the principles of statutory interpretation outlined in the leading case
Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Bankrupt), Re
, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27; 221 N.R. 241; 106 O.A.C. 1, must be applied. In that decision, Iacobucci, J., writing for the court, outlined the following framework for statutory interpretation, at pp. 40-41 [S.C.R.]:
"At the heart of this conflict is an issue of statutory interpretation. Consistent with the findings of the Court of Appeal, the plain meaning of the words of the provisions here in question appears to restrict the obligation to pay termination and severance pay to those employers who have actively terminated the employment of their employees. At first blush, bankruptcy does not fit comfortably into this interpretation. However, with respect, I believe this analysis is incomplete.
"Although much has been written about the interpretation of legislation (see, e.g. Ruth Sullivan,
Statutory Interpretation (1997)
; Ruth Sullivan,
Driedger on the Construction of Statutes
(3rd Ed. 1994) (hereinafter '
Construction of Statutes
'); Pierre-André Côté, the
Interpretation of Legislation in Canada
(2nd Ed. 1991)), Elmer Driedger in
Construction of Statutes
(2nd Ed. 1983) best encapsulates the approach upon which I prefer to rely. He recognizes that statutory interpretation cannot be founded on the wording of the legislation alone. At p. 87 he states:
'Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament.'
"Recent cases which have cited the above passage with approval include:
R. v. Hydro-Québec
, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 213,
Royal Bank of Canada v. Sparrow Electric Corp.
, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411;
Verdun v. Toronto-Dominion Bank
, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 550;
Friesen v. Canada
, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 103.
"I also rely upon s. 10 of the
Interpretation Act
, R.S.O. 1980, c. 219, which provides that every Act 'shall be deemed to be remedial' and directs that every Act shall 'receive such fair, large and liberal construction and interpretation as will best ensure the attainment of the object of the Act according to its true intent, meaning and spirit'.
"Although the Court of Appeal looked to the plain meaning of the specific provisions in question in the present case, with respect, I believe that the court did not pay sufficient attention to the scheme of the
ESA
, its object or the intention of the legislature; nor was the context of the words in issue appropriately recognized. I now turn to a discussion of these issues."