[15]
In
Eli Lilly & Co. et al. v. Novopharm Ltd. et al.
, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 129; 227 N.R. 201 at p. 144 [S.C.R.], Iacobucci, J., writing for the court, approved the following summary of the legislative scheme in the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
:
"The new NOC regime is lucidly summarized in the following excerpt from the judgment of Teitelbaum, J., in
Glaxo Wellcome Inc. v. Canada (Minister of National Health and Welfare)
(1997), 75 C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 131-32:
'A NOC, which formally authorizes a drug to be sold, is issued by the Minister after a drug manufacturer has complied on two fronts. The first element of compliance concerns the overall safety and efficacy of the drug: (see regulation C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 870). The second element of compliance figures on the drug manufacturer's non-infringement of certain patents embodied in the drug. This second, rather more unexpected, patent-related requirement came into existence after changes to the compulsory licensing regime. Formerly, under a compulsory license, a generic drug manufacturer could obtain a licensed supply of a patented drug from the patent owner. The NOC process did not then concern itself with questions of patent infringement. However, with the abolition of compulsory licenses under the
Patent Act Amendment Act, 1992
, ... (the "
Patent Act
") the regime for obtaining NOCs also changed. Generic drug manufacturers now seeking NOCs must file what is called a Notice of Allegation under section 5 of the
Regulations
.
. . . . .
'In effect, under section 5(3) of the
Regulations
, in a "Notice of Allegation", the generic drug manufacturer, "the second person", signals its compliance with the patents embodied in a medicine. Under section 4 of the
Regulations
, the patent owner or licensee, usually a brand name drug manufacturer like the applicants, submits a list of the patents that contain claims for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine. Under section 3 of the
Regulations
, the Minister compiles the patent lists into a public document called the "Patent Register".'"