[5]
The applicant, who is representing himself, argues essentially that the Minister erred in applying the criteria set out in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Information Circular 92-2 (IC 92-2) and failed to consider all the information submitted by the applicant in making a determination under s. 220.(3.1) of the
Income Tax Act
. The applicant's submissions can be divided into three subcategories:
1) The interest resulted from circumstances beyond his control. It is argued that the applicant has always complied in a timely manner with Revenue Canada's requests, namely, the filing of income tax returns and payment in full for the taxation years 1994, 1995 and 1996.
2) Processing delays resulted in the applicant not being informed within a reasonable time that an amount was owing. It is submitted that the applicant was not informed of the balance owing until July 21, 1997 even though tax returns were filed on time, i.e. April 30, 1994, 1995 and 1996. From March 25, 1997, the applicant had difficulty in contacting the tax officer from the Audit Division which resulted in further delay leading to Mr. Beaulac's decision dated December 9, 1997.
3) Material available to the public contained errors which led the applicant to file returns or make payments based on incorrect information.
a) The applicant submits that Mr. Beaulac's letter dated December 9, 1997 indicating that capital cost allowance to increase a rental loss is not permitted on rental units qualified as multiple unit residential buildings (MURBS) contradicts information received earlier by letter dated June 27, 1997 stating that the applicant's buildings were reclassified as Class 3 pursuant to schedule 11 of the
Income Tax Regulations
and that capital cost allowance was only available to reduce a net rental income to nil.
b) It is also submitted that, contrary to information available to the public, Revenue Canada disallowed external painting as a current expense; repairs as capital expenditures where it is a condition of sale; deduction of legal fees, financial services and expenses used in preparation of tax returns from the proceeds of disposition; costs of landscaping around rental property; use of the calendar year for claiming capital cost allowance on rental properties; the necessity to provide a tax shelter identification number only after August 1, 1989; postponement or deferral of a capital gain; recapture of capital cost allowance; the undepreciated capital cost (UCC); as well as the calculation of capital gain and capital loss.
Respondent's Submissions