[12]
Subsequently, by amendment effective upon Royal Assent, September 13, 1988, S.C. 1988, c. 55, s. 170 changed the exceptional process of s. 225.2 to require prior authorization by a court of action takin in circumstances where "there are reasonable grounds to believe that the collection of all or any part of an amount assessed in respect of a taxpayer would be jeopardized by a delay in the collection thereof". The amended s. 225.2, in force at the time of the order made November 28, 1988, provides in part:
"225.2(2) Notwithstanding s. 225.1, where, on ex parte application by the Minister, a judge is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the collection of all or any part of an amount assessed in respect of a taxpayer would be jeopardized by a delay in the collection thereof, he shall, on such terms as he considers reasonable in the circumstances, authorize the Minister to take forthwith any of the actions described in paragraphs 225.1(1)(a) to (g) with respect to the amount.
"(3) An authorization under subs. (2) in respect of an amount assessed in respect of a taxpayer may be granted by a judge notwithstanding that a notice of assessment in respect of that amount has not been sent to the taxpayer at or before the time the application is made where the judge is satisfied that the receipt of the notice of assessment by the taxpayer would likely further jeopardize the collection of the amount, and for the purposes of ss. 222, 223, 224, 224.1, 224.3 and 225, the amount in respect of which an authorization is so granted shall be deemed to be an amount payable under this Act.
"(4) Statements contained in an affidavit filed in the context of an application under this section may be based on belief with the grounds therefor.
"(5) An authorization granted under this section in respect of a taxpayer shall be served by the Minister on the taxpayer within 72 hours after it is granted, except where the judge orders the authorization to be served at some other time specified in the authorization, and, where a notice of assessment has not been sent to the taxpayer at or before the time of the application, the notice of assessment shall be served together with the authorization.
. . . . .
"(8) Where a judge of a court has granted an authorization under this section in respect of a taxpayer, the taxpayer may, upon six clear days notice to the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, apply to a judge of the court to review the authorization.
. . . . .
"(11) On an application under subs. (8), the judge shall determine the question summarily and may confirm, set aside or vary the authorization and make such other order as he considers appropriate.
. . . . .
"(13) No appeal lies from an order of a judge made pursuant to subs. (11)."
In the case at bar the order of this court made under s. 225.2(2) on November 28, 1988, which the application of Satellite seeks to have set aside, provided as follows:
"Upon Motion dated the 28th day of November, 1988, on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada; upon hearing counsel on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada as represented by the Minister of National Revenue, and upon reading the affidavits of Sherman Lee, Nancy Olexiuk, George Rennick, and Joe Giallanardo, all sworn the 25th day of November, 1988;
"1. This Court Orders That the Minister is authorized to take forthwith any of the actions described in paragraphs 225.1(1)(a) to (g) of the Income Tax Act, S.C. with respect to the respondent including authorizing the Sheriff of the County of Wellington to continue to hold under seizure a 1984 Lake Renegade airplane belonging to the respondent bearing registration #N14008, serial #9."
The Tests To Be Met