[7]
The second preliminary issue dealt with by the Prothonotary was the time at which the dominant purpose of the author of a report or of the person or authority under whose direction it is made is to be judged. Hargrave, P., considered three relevant times: the time at which the report was commissioned, the time at which the report was prepared, and the time at which the dominant purpose changes. With respect to the last of these, the Prothonotary stated:
"There may also be, to my mind, a third relevant time to consider, that when the dominant purpose changes. This change of dominant purpose may occur where, as is the case here, an insurer retains an investigator without apparent intent that the report have, as its dominant purpose, instruction of the insurer's lawyers. However, as the investigation proceeds and one adjusting report succeeds another, as often happens, at some point the dominant purpose changes. This division in the investigation is not governed, as suggested in some of the earlier cases, by division into an adjusting stage, which generates no privileged material, and later a litigation stage which does not generate privileged material, but rather it is always the dominant purpose test to which one must look: see for example
Shaughnessy Golf and Country Club
[supra] at pp. 320-321. Mr. Justice Esson comments, at p. 320, that the analysis of an adjusting stage and a litigation stage '... gives insufficient weight to the essential question of the dominant purpose for the document coming into being and, in the context of adjusters' reports, gives virtually no weight to the considerations in favour of open discovery which lie at the root of the change in the law ...'. The concept of a change of dominant purpose in a series of adjusting reports is touched upon in the
Shaughnessy Golf and Country Club
case at p. 322, where the court notes that at a certain point all matters other than subrogation had become relatively insignificant. It would be at that point that the dominant purpose could provide the protection of privilege." (pp. 12-13.)