[9]
The Prothonotary considered each of the four adjusters' reports and made the following findings:
"The June 27 report refers to the assignment of the matter on May 31, which is mentioned in the Adjuster's affidavit. It touches on a subsequent meeting with the insurer and deals briefly with insurance coverage. The report probably goes far enough to establish a reasonable prospect of litigation but stops short of demonstrating it was prepared for the dominant purpose of being provided to counsel.
"The tenor of the second report is that any litigation might not involve Towns. The second report certainly does not establish the dominant purpose.
"The July 25 report continues the investigations outlined in the preceding report and then refers to a scheduled meeting with counsel representing Mr. Jordan, who subsequently became the plaintiff in this action. I have some doubt as to whether this report shows a reasonable contemplation or prospect of litigation. I would note that a claim for privilege must be proven with respect to each document. An adjuster's report that makes a weak claim or no claim to privilege cannot come into a privileged position on the coat-tails of other reports in the series: see for example the
Shaughnessy Golf and Country Club
case at p. 321 where Mr. Justice of Appeal Esson notes that:
'The fact that litigation is a reasonable prospect after a casualty, and the fact that that prospect is one of the predominant reasons for the creation of the reports is now not good enough. Unless such purpose is, in respect of the particular document, the dominant purpose for creating the document, it is not privileged.'
and at pp. 322 and 323 where he rules that early reports, before the necessary dominant purpose became established, would have to be produced.
"That the final report of September 11, 1995 is addressed both to the insurer and to the firm now representing Towns, is a factor to be kept in mind although it is not a deciding factor as to privilege. While the report is a brief one, it involves Towns' counsel sufficiently to meet the dominant purpose test.
"I have concluded that the first three adjusting reports, June 27, July 18 and July 25, ought to be produced, but that the September 11, 1995, report is privileged ..."
3. The Appeal