[12]
With respect to whether Ms. Marsh had been fairly and equitably treated, the Adjudicator wrote:
"The Grievor believes that it is the responsibility of 'E' Division Staffing and Personnel to find, or assist her in finding, employment at her discharge location (Edmonton). Staffing and Personnel insist that the primary element of the noted policy deals with the disposal of a principal residence and the purchase of a new principal residence at the retirement destination. Any transfer of a member in relation to the provisions of this section is at best an inferred appropriation, not a right or an obligation on the part of the RCMP. Staffing and Personnel do not ordinarily do job searches for retiring members. If there is a need within the RCMP that coincides with those of a member seeking to retire, and both parties can benefit, there is consideration given to those circumstances. Normally, this process is initiated by the member, not S&P.
"While there is no doubt that isolated cases have been dealt with in different fashions, I do not believe that it was the intent of the noted policy to deal with a situation in which the member would seek to relocate to a new job for two years at the retirement end. It is clear to me that the member is to be discharged from the place he or she is originally posted when the request is made, not years later at the retirement location.
"The Grievor has asserted that many other members have been given the advantage of what she terms as a 'pre-retirement move' yet she has not provided any specific examples of those situations. Given my interpretation of policy, and the lack of detail provided by the Grievor, I must conclude, based on the documentation before me, that the member has been equitably and fairly treated.
"Finally, there is no evidence before me that the Grievor was forced to retire. Quite to the contrary. She was told that there would be no job for her at the retirement destination prior to the submission of her discharge papers. Even after that date, the Grievor could have withdrawn her request. She did not."