[28]
In the present case, Ms. Marsh's affidavit, filed in support of her application, is silent on the existence of any actual prejudice. In her written argument, she describes the prejudice she has suffered in the following terms:
"53. In the case at bar, it was almost 5 years by the time the Applicant requested a Level II review of the Level I Adjudicator's decision. At [sic] central issue in the [sic] both the Level I and II decisions, was the fact that the Applicant did not raise any evidence of members who had received the benefit of a 'pre-retirement move'. However, at the time the original grievance was filed there was evidence that the Applicant did have knowledge of individuals who had received the benefit of 'pre-retirement move' under the policy. Moreover, the Applicant also knew that Sgt. Deevy possessed knowledge of members who had received this benefit.
"54. The Applicant submits that if she has received the Level I Adjudicator's decision 'as soon as possible' as contemplated under s. 31(6) of the
RCMP Act
, that she would have been able to raise further evidence of members who had taken such a 'pre-retirement move'. However, because of the 5-year delay, she is prejudiced in that she has moved from Burnaby, witnesses may have moved, and relevant documents may have been lost. Furthermore, even if the witnesses could be tracked down, there is no guarantee that they could now give the evidence as existed at the time of the grievance. As it was stated by Lawton, J., in
Douglas v. Saskatchewan (Human Rights Commission)
:
'In our present mobile society it is reasonable to assume that witnesses can be hard to locate. I believe that minds dim and memories fade and not just in old people ...'
Douglas v. Saskatchewan (Human Rights Commission)
(1989), 79 Sask.R. 44 (Sask. Q.B.), at para. 25.
RCMP Act
, supra, at para. 1.
"55. Because of the delay in receiving the Level I Adjudicator's decision, the Applicant was prevented from accessing witnesses that would have otherwise been available to her. As a result the Applicant suffered real evidentiary prejudice in presenting evidence in support of her contention that other members had received the benefit of the 'pre-retirement move'."