[9]
The report of Dr. Peer, a pediatrician, that is referred to in the foregoing report and was addressed to Dr. Golda, is dated the 12th day of June, 1991 and in substance reads as follows:
"I saw Rafal on the 10th of June, 1991. He is nine and has a history of asthma. I understand that you reviewed the reports from Poland and between 1987 and 1989 he was admitted a few times to hospital and was in severe asthmatic attack. He required IV steroids at that time. I do not know whether there are environmental factors responsible for it or other reasons but it seems that since he came to Canada about 1½ years ago he has been stable without any attacks. Initially he was in Newfoundland and was treated with Ventolin but didn't really require much of it. Since then he has improved gradually and he apparently did not require any medications at the present time.
"He has no asthma on exertion and apparently does not have any known allergies to cause any problems since he came to Canada.
"The past medical history revealed that he was born in Poland, birthweight was 2.5 kg, he was small for gestational age. Currently he is in Grade 3 in Canada and is doing well at school.
"The family history revealed that the sister aged 11½ is healthy, the parents are healthy, no history of any asthma or allergies in the family.
"On examination, Rafal is a nine year old boy, weight is 28 kg, the height is 131 cm., both around the 50th percentile line, indicating very good growth. The blood pressure is 100/70 and the heart rate is about 80 per minute. The head was normal, eyes are normal, he has no ENT infections. The lungs are clear to auscultation, the air entry was excellent, there were no rales, rhonchi or bronchospasms. He has no murmurs, the abdomen is normal, the neurological examination is unremarkable.
"Rafal seems to do well at this point. He does not appear to require any medications for his asthma and it is possible that his asthma was precipitated by certain allergens which are not present around this area."