[22]
With respect to the contrary view, I cannot interpret the above quoted passage to mean anything other than that the adjudicator reserved jurisdiction to order a remedy in this matter. Furthermore, even if the adjudicator had purported to retain jurisdiction with respect to the merits of the case, he could not have done so. An adjudicator cannot confer powers on him or herself. The authority and powers of an adjudicator stem only from the governing statute. In
Chandler v. Alberta Association of Architects
, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 848; 99 N.R. 277; 101 A.R. 321, at p. 861 to 862 [S.C.R.], Sopinka, J. (for himself, Wilson, J., and Dickson, C.J.), stated:
"As a general rule, once such a tribunal has reached a final decision in respect to the matter that is before it in accordance with its enabling statute, that decision cannot be revisited because the tribunal has changed its mind, made an error within jurisdiction or because there has been a change of circumstances. It can only do so if there has been a slip or error within the exceptions enunciated in
Paper Machinery Ltd. v. J.O. Ross Engineering Corp.
, supra.
"To this extent, the principle of "functus officio" applies. It is based, however, on the policy ground which favours finality of proceedings rather than the rule which was developed with respect to formal judgments of a court whose decision was subject to a full appeal ... Justice may require the reopening of administrative proceedings in order to provide relief which would otherwise be available on appeal.
"Accordingly, the principle should not be strictly applied where there are indications in the enabling statute that a decision can be reopened in order to enable the tribunal to discharge the function committed to it by enabling legislation. This was the situation in
Grillas
, supra.
"Furthermore, if the tribunal has failed to dispose of an issue which is fairly raised by the proceedings and of which the tribunal is empowered by its enabling statute to dispose, it ought to be allowed to complete its statutory task."
Furthermore, in
Huneault v. Central Mortgage and Housing Corp.
(1981), 41 N.R. 214 (F.C.A.), Thurlow, C.J., stated at p. 217 for the court:
"In our view the first and second orders made by the adjudicator exhausted the powers he was authorized by s. 61.5(9) [now 242(4)] to exercise and he thereupon became and was "functus officio". He had ordered reinstatement. He had ordered the payment of compensation. He had not ordered anything falling within s. 61.5(9)(c) but he had finally determined the complaint before him. He no longer had any power, statutory or otherwise, to reconsider or withdraw or change either order. Moreover, the purported reservation by him of authority to make such orders, if any, as might be appropriate and necessary after receipt of submissions on the question of the Unemployment Insurance benefit refunds cannot affect our conclusion."