[9]
Counsel for Kaczmar points out that the psychologist is not the one who will have to cross-examine witnesses with respect to the test and its application. The order made by the Chairperson amounts to providing Mr. Kaczmar with an independent assessment of the test, but limits his ability to make use of that information in the adversarial forum where his rights will be determined. One is reminded of Rothstein, J.'s (as he then was), comments in
Barton and Watkins v. Canada (Attorney General)
(1993), 66 F.T.R. 54, at p. 57.
"[14] The adversarial nature of the pro­ceedings in this case have been described in
Wiebe v. Public Service Commission (Appeal Board) (Can.)
, [1992] 2 F.C. 592; 141 N.R. 387 (C.A.), wherein Huges­sen, J.A., stated at p. 595 (F.C.):
'Proceedings under s. 21, though styled an "inquiry", are very much adversarial in nature, with the applicant and the employer each being on opposite sides of the question and each generally being represented by persons experienced in this specialized type of dispute. The situation was aptly described by Catta­nach, J., in the Trial Division [
Millward v. Public Service Commission,
[1974] 2 F.C. 530, at p. 539] as follows:
"While there is not a lis inter parties [sic] in the true sense of that term, there is, nevertheless, a contest between two parties. The deputy head is before the board to justify that the selection of the successful candidate was on the basis of the merit system and the un­successful candidate is present to estab­lish that this was not the case. Such situation has been described and estab­lished by authority as a quasi-lis between quasi-parties."
'In such adversarial proceedings, parties are entitled to be represented. Such rep­resentation must be effective, in the sense that counsel or representative must have an opportunity of knowing what evidence will be given by the witnesses that he or she will call. He or she must have the opportunity of reviewing the evidence of the expert witness, of orga­nizing the evidence, of ensuring that the evidence is coherent, of emphasizing its best features and of preparing the witness for cross-examination. These are the normal functions of counsel. Without access to all relevant information and in particular, the confidential information upon which the expert evidence would be based and upon which the witness could be cross-examined, counsel or a representative cannot properly perform the task of persuading the court or tribu­nal as to the merits of the client's case.'
"[15] In this case, the Appeal Board, in its decision, ignored this role of counsel or representative by limiting disclosure only to a person who could give evidence before the tribunal. In making such a ruling, the Appeal Board erred by denying the applicants the right to have their repre­sentative, who was in charge of managing and conducting their case, know the same information that would be known be known by his potential witness. While the Appeal Board's concern with confidential­ity was appropriate, it was an error for the Appeal Board to limit disclosure in the manner it did."