[11]
Hasan
was considered by McGillis, J., in
Murphy v. Canada (Attorney General)
, [1998] F.C.J. No. 1843; 161 F.T.R. 1 (T.D.). The learned judge undertook a long and detailed examination of the disclosure provi­sions in the
Regulations
made pursuant to the
Act
as they existed from time to time and con­cluded that the scoring manual likely was subject to disclosure if, on the facts, it was relevant to the matter in dispute:
"30. Counsel for the respondent submitted, among other things, that the scoring man­ual was not subject to disclosure under the terms of s. 24(1) of the amended
Regula­tions
on the basis of the jurisprudence decided in the context of the previous
Regulations
. I cannot accept that argu­ment. In my opinion, the amended legisla­tive scheme was designed in order to balance the competing interests of the appellant in receiving full disclosure and of the government in protecting the confiden­tiality and integrity of the standardized tests. In order to achieve the appropriate balance, the amended
Regulations
provide for full disclosure to an appellant, recog­nizing that circumstances nevertheless may exist in which disclosure should be refused or granted subject to conditions in order to protect the confidentiality and integrity of the standardized test. Indeed, the amend­ments clearly contemplate that documents or information pertaining to a standardized test will be subject to disclosure; other­wise, there would be no necessity for the provisions granting discretionary powers to the deputy head, Commission and appeal board in relation to standardized tests. The scoring manual is one of the documents directly related to the administration and use of the standardized test and, as such, may be information or a document '... that pertains to the appellant or to the success­ful candidate and that is liable to be dis­closed before the appeal board', within the meaning of s. 24(1). The question of whether a scoring manual ought to be disclosed to an appellant under s. 24(1) depends on its relevance in the context of the facts of the case. However, even if the scoring manual is subject to disclosure on the facts of a particular case, the deputy head or the Commission and the appeal board may exercise their various discre­tionary powers under the amended
Regula­tions
."