[60]
Mr. Wiener was subsequently hired. The expert affidavit which he eventually prepared for use on the reference before Mr. Preston, relied on the documentation which had been refused to the plaintiffs at discovery. That affidavit carries the date November 23, 1989. It also relied on a vast quantity of documentation that the plaintiffs had neither asked for nor seen before. During the hearing of the reference, the defendant sought to have these documents admitted into evidence. Mr. Preston refused. His reasons for this ruling are:
"The documents objected to by Mr. Jolliffe are documents that have been requested by Mr. Jolliffe on discovery. At that time their production was refused and counsel for the defendant stated that the reason for such refusal was that they were not going to rely on them. After Mr. Wiener was retained he indicated that he was going to approach the assessment of profits in a way that would necessitate the use of these documents.
"It is my opinion that at that time defendant's counsel should immediately have moved for the introduction of further documents, that up until that time counsel thought irrelevant.
"This would have put counsel for the plaintiff on notice in sufficient time if the motion had been successful to request further cross-examination and if necessary a short adjournment of the start of the reference, for that purpose.
"We are now in the fifth day of the reference and I am of the view, that it is now too late for a request for this production of this material to be made.
"In November 1987 the trial judge made an order directing the defendant within thirty days to provide the plaintiffs with a list of documents which sets out
all documents in the defendant's possession
or control which relate to its sales costs and profits in respect of the infringing units. In answer to this order a list of documents
containing only the documents, that in their opinion
, were related to the issues upon which they were going to rely on the reference dealing with the sales, costs and profits in respect of the infringing units was prepared and filed.
"At discovery plaintiffs' counsel renewed their request for all the documents covered by the order of the trial judge and supported their request with authorities showing that in a similar reference such documents were used.
"Mr. Wiener in his affidavit has taken the position that there are two approaches full cost and differential and for this purpose the documents he requires are those that had been originally requested by counsel for the plaintiff and refused.
"If immediately after this came to the attention of counsel for the defendant, even if only one week before the affidavit was filed, a motion for the filing of a supplementary list had been served on the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs would then have been on notice, before they were required to file, the expert affidavit of Mr. Belbeck, that the position taken by the defendant's counsel had changed. A request for an adjournment of the reference could have been then made if necessary. Further cross-examination could have been held of Mr. Nadler covering the new productions and the matters would have proceeded without any prejudice to the plaintiff.
"Mr. Garvis has referred me to rule 461 and two cases decided by Mr. Justice Mahoney. In the Moore Dry Kiln case the parties later found additional documents. That is not this case, the documents were in the defendant's possession and they stated that the documents were not going to be relied upon. This position having been relied upon by the plaintiffs. They proceed to prepare their case and their experts affidavit on that basis.
"The defendants having taken a position of refusing to produce documents that clearly should have been produced pursuant to the order of the trial judge dated November 30th, 1987, cannot now seek relief from rule 461.
"Associate Chief Justice Noel in his decision in National Capital Commission v. Lapointe et al. stated that 'if the document was one which plaintiff had in its possession at the time Denison's affidavit was prepared, it ought to have been mentioned in the list of documents which plaintiff had to supply to the expropriated party in accordance with rule 447(2) of this court'.
"Until yesterday counsel for the defendant took no step to introduce the productions now objected to into court for the purpose of this reference. It is my opinion that counsel for the defendants having maintained a position throughout it is now too late for another position to be introduced.
"For all of the above reasons I refuse the production at this time of any documents that were not relied on by the defendants on the discovery of Mr. Nadler."