[62]
Mr. Preston subsequently awarded costs on a solicitor client basis for the days mentioned above. He gave reasons in the following terms:
"I now turn to the question of costs of this reference. Mr. Jolliffe argues that because the order of Cullen, J., was not complied with, part of the costs should be given to the plaintiff on a solicitor and client basis. Mr. Uditsky in his submission stated that if the defendant was at fault, it could only be from November when the defendant first became aware of the theory developed in Mr. Wiener's affidavit.
"In October 1989, a consent order was signed and for the first time the plaintiff was given access to the 1984 statement and general ledgers of the defendant. However it was not until the expert affidavit of Mr. Wiener was served that the plaintiffs' solicitor became aware of all the documents the defendant would be relying on. My ruling, at the time or the objection by Mr. Jolliffe to the acceptance of certain exhibits to Mr. Wiener's affidavit, disallowed the introduction of this new material. Mr. Jolliffe, however, waived his objection on the condition that he be allowed to discuss the question of costs relating to the discovery process and the documents in issue.
"I am of the opinion that, if the defendant had complied with the order of Cullen, J., relating to the production of a list of documents which set out all documents in the defendant's possession or control which relate to its sales, costs and profits in respect of the infringing units, discovery of the defendant would have concluded in two days. The usual undertakings would then have been answered and the case ready for reference. However, two additional days of discovery were held, the plaintiff still not able to procure records for 1984, the year the defendant commenced production of the infringing units.
"I submit that the plaintiffs should receive costs, on a solicitor and client basis, pursuant to rule 344(1) for two days' preparation for discovery time as well as for the two final days of discovery of the defendant. If all the documents had been produced it in my view these last two days of discovery would not have been necessary. I would also allow solicitor and client costs for December 8, 1989, the day the objection was made and argued by the plaintiffs' solicitor, to the documents, produced for the first time in the defendant experts affidavit. Subject to the above I submit the plaintiffs are entitled to their taxed costs of this reference on a party and party basis."