[13]
The applicant here seeks judicial review of that decision. The relevant statutory provisions are ss. 8(1)(a), 8(2), 9(1) and 11(1) of the Immigration Regulations, 1978:
"8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependants, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant,
(a) in the case of an immigrant, other than an immigrant described in paragraph (b), (c) or (e), on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I; ...
"8(2) A visa officer shall award to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I the appropriate number of units of assessment for each factor in accordance with the criteria set out in column II thereof opposite that factor, but he shall not award for any factor more units of assessment than the maximum number set out in column III thereof opposite that factor.
"9(1) Where an immigrant, other than a member of the family class, an assisted relative, a Convention refugee seeking resettlement or an investor, makes an application for a visa, a visa officer may, subject to s. 11, issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants, if
(a) he and his dependants, whether accompanying dependants or not, are not members of any inadmissible class and otherwise meet the requirements of the Act and these Regulations; and
(b) on the basis of his assessment in accordance with s. 8
(i) in the case of an immigrant other than a retired person or an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 70 units of assessment, or
(ii) in the case of an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 25 units of assessment.
"11(1) Subject to subss. (3) and (4), a visa officer shall not issue an immigrant visa pursuant to ss. 9 or 10 to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I and is not awarded any units of assessment for the factor set out in item 3 thereof unless the immigrant
(a) has arranged employment in Canada and has a written statement from the proposed employer verifying that he is willing to employ an inexperienced person in the position in which the person is to be employed, and the visa officer is satisfied that the person can perform the work required without experience; or
(b) is qualified for and is prepared to engage in employment in a designated occupation."