[50]
Janssen also filed the evidence of six fact witnesses. Dr. Furuhama and Hiroyoshi Kinpara were the only two that were not cross-examined:
(a)
Dr. Isao Hayakawa
is one of the named inventors of the patent in suit. He joined Daiichi in 1969 and, in 1972, became involved in researching anti-infectives. In 1985, he became the Senior Researcher and the Pre-clinical Coordinator with respect to levofloxacin's product development.
(b)
Dr. Kazuhisa Furuhama
is employed as a toxicologist at Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co. Dr. Furuhama was the scientist who conducted the toxicity screening tests for levofloxacin, which is the subject matter of Canadian Patent No. 1,304,080.
(c)
Paul Herbert
is a senior partner at the law firm of Riches, McKenzie & Herbert LLP where he practices intellectual property. A qualified barrister and solicitor and registered patent agent in Canada, he is responsible for prosecuting the Canadian Patent Application Serial No. 512,000, filed on June 19, 1986, which issued on June 23, 1992 as Canadian Patent No. 1,304,080.
(d)
Dr. Michiyuki Kato
is employed as a toxicological pathologist at Daiichi Sankyo Company, Limited. Dr. Kato worked in the Drug Safety Research Center of Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. at the time levofloxacin was developed, and is familiar with the toxicity screening tests for levofloxacin.
(e)
Hiroyoshi Kinpara
is Group Manager, Supervising and Operation Group, Intellectual Property Department of Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co., formerly Daiichi Seiyaku Co. Mr. Kinpara had previously been the Assistant Manager of Daïchi of Seiyaku Company's legal department.
(f)
Michael I. Stewart
is a senior partner at Sim & McBurney, a partnership of patent and trade-mark agents engaged in the preparation, filing and prosecution of patent, trade-mark, industrial design, integrated circuit and copyright applications in Canada and the Unites States of America. He is also a registered patent agent in Canada and the United States where he has gained extensive experience in obtaining patents in a wide range of technologies.