[52]
Apotex tendered the evidence of six expert witnesses, all of whom were cross-examined:
(a)
Dr. Neal Castagnoli
is the Peters Professor of Chemistry Emeritus at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. A principal focus of his research during the past 30 years has been concerned with the analysis of the relationship between chemical structure and biological activity, including toxicity.
(b)
Dr. Paul Erhardt
is the Director of the Center for Drug Design and Development and Professor of Medicinal and Biological Chemistry at the University of Toledo. Dr. Erhardt's research in medicinal chemistry focuses on small molecular therapeutics, drug and formulation design. Dr. Erhardt's evidence addresses whether the '080 patent provides sufficient information to justify the selection of levofloxacin over ofloxacin on the basis of its unexpected properties.
(c)
Dr. Richard Kellogg
is the former Dean of Chemistry at the University of Groningen, and is currently the Director of Syncom BV, a company he co-founded in 1988 that specializes in all aspects of organic synthesis. Dr. Kellogg has published widely in the fields of chiral compounds, their synthesis and separation.
(d)
Dr. Howard Leibowitz
is the Sherwook J. and H. Lerene Tarlow Professor of Ophthamology at the Boston University School of Medicine. Dr. Leibowitz is a recognized expert in infectious disease of the eye and antimicrobial ocular medications. Dr. Leibowitz' evidence addresses the use of ofloxacin and levofloxacin in ophthalmic treatments.
(e)
Dr. Kurt Martin Mislow
is the Hugh Stott Taylor Professor Emeritus Chemistry at Princeton University. Throughout his career, the dominant theme of his research has been the development of stereochemical theory with an emphasis on the study of molecular chirality in organic, inorganic and biochemical systems, including pharmaceutical agents.
(f)
Mr. Gerald O.S. Oyen
is a partner of the firm Oyen Wiggs Green & Mutala LLP and has practiced in the area of patent law and other areas of intellectual property since 1967. Mr. Oyen provides evidence on the issues relating to deemed abandonment and patent prosecution practice.