[4]
The RPD's identity finding centred on the conclusion that the Resident Identity Card [Identity Card], proffered by the Applicant, contained a picture of someone who was not the Applicant. The Applicant appeared in person before the RPD. The Board also had before it the picture of the Applicant that was taken upon his arrival in Canada. The Board wrote as follows regarding the differences between the Applicant's appearance and the photograph on the Identity Card:
In examining the RIC photograph, the panel notes that it did not appear to be the person before me. The panel also notes that the claimant had his picture taken at the age of 35 in October 2009 when he filed his refugee claim and that the photograph is before the panel as part of exhibit R/A 2. The photograph on the RIC was taken in June 2007 when the claimant was 33 years of age. The claimant is now 37 years of age. The panel notes that despite the passage of two years, the claimant's refugee photograph taken in 2009 is identical to his appearance at the hearing. The person who appeared before the panel is clearly the person who filed the refugee claim in 2009. However, in comparing the photograph taken in 2009 to the photograph on the RIC the panel notes a stark difference. Although there is only two years between the photographs, the claimant appears to be far older in his refugee photograph. The panel compared the photograph in the RIC to the claimant during the hearing. The panel noted that the claimant's hairline was much different when compared to the hairline in the photograph of the RIC. The hairline in the RIC photograph is higher on the forehead. The RIC photograph depicts a person whose ears extend away from his face to a greater extent than how the claimant's ears appeared before the panel. In addition, the top of the claimant's ears are higher than his eye level whereas, in the RIC photograph, the tops of the ears are at the bottom of the eye level. The claimant's nostrils were larger than those depicted in the RIC photograph. The shape of the claimant's lips is more elongated than those of the RIC photograph. While there are some similarities as one might find with persons who are related, the panel finds, on a balance of probabilities, that the claimant is not the person depicted in the RIC photograph.