[7]
At issue here is the immigration officer's interpretation and application of immigration manual guidelines regarding the assessment of humanitarian and compassionate grounds, specifically IE-9.07 regarding the consequences of return to country of origin. A number of decisions of this court have upheld these guidelines. In
Yhap v. M.E.I.
, [1990] 1 F.C. 722; 34 F.T.R. 26; 9 Imm. L.R. 243, Jerome, A.C.J., expressly declined to decide upon the adequacy of the guidelines for humanitarian and compassionate review, but he observed that those guidelines appeared to constitute a permissible statement of general policy. In
Vidal v. M.E.I.
(1991), 41 F.T.R. 118; 49 Admin. L.R. 118; 13 Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (T.D.), Strayer, J., made the following comments:
"I would observe in passing that it must follow as a corollary of the reasoning of Jerome, A.C.J., in
Yhap
that an applicant cannot complain if an immigration officer fails or refuses to follow the Minister's guidelines. Nor can he complain if an immigration officer applies any factor in lieu of those in the guidelines as long as this is done in good faith and the factor is not wholly irrelevant to any conceivable view of humanitarian and compassionate considerations. Further, it is for the officer to decide if he is convicted of the truth of an applicant's assertions, unless perhaps he makes findings of fact which are clearly without regard to any material before him. It is not for the court to sit in appeal on his findings of fact or his weighing of the various factors ... I am satisfied that these guidelines adequately convey to immigration officers that, particularly in respect of humanitarian and compassionate considerations, the guidelines are not to be regarded as exhaustive and definitive. It is emphasized and reemphasized that officers are expected to use their best judgment. I believe they amount to 'general policy' or 'rough rules of thumb' which Jerome, A.C.J., recognized as permissible in the
Yhap
case.
I would go farther than Jerome, A.C.J., and say that such guidelines are not only permissible but highly desirable in the circumstances.
" (my underline)
In
Vidal
, Strayer, J., directed his attention to the specific guidelines at issue here and found that they were adequately general and that they did not inhibit the Immigration Officer from considering any number of factors contributing to "undue hardship".