[18]
In a similar situation involving the deportation of the father of a child born in Canada, Mr. Justice Joyal provided reasons for a denial of leave to appeal which canvassed some of the jurisprudence on the issue of whether removal of a parent constituted cruel and unusual punishment because the child would have to follow (
Ramnarine v. M.E.I.
(1992), 53 F.T.R. 130). He referred to a Court of Appeal decision,
M.E.I. v. Kretowicz
(1987), 77 N.R. 38 (F.C.A.), where Hugessen, J.A., states:
"On the one hand, nothing in the record indicates that the life or security of the child will be adversely affected if she goes to live in Poland. On the other hand and still more significantly, the child, whose father, it is still asserted, continues to care for her, will not necessarily be obliged to leave Canada simply because her mother is required to go. The decision to take the child to Poland with the mother or to leave her in Canada with the father will be made by the parents themselves and the consequences of whichever choice is made cannot be laid at the Government's door. In this respect, the case is very close to the decision of this court in the case of
Denis v. The Queen
, [1976] 1 F.C. 499, and I can do no better than to quote the words of Le Dain, J.:
'What the appellant complains of, should it occur and however regrettable it might be, will not be the direct and unavoidable result of the application of a law of Canada but rather the result of her mother's decision as to whether to take her with her or to leave her in Canada. Even if the result, in either case, be regarded as virtually an inevitable one because of the difficulty of the decision for the mother, I strongly doubt that it could be said to result in arbitrary exile or cruel and unusual treatment within the meaning of s. 2 of the Canadian Bill of Rights.'" (at pages 501-502).
For these reasons, I do not believe the removal of the applicant constitutes cruel and unusual punishment or treatment of her or her child.
Conclusion: