[21]
The language of s. 71.2(4) being, at best, ambiguous I believe my conclusion is reinforced by paragraph 43(c) of the
Interpretation Act
, quoted above. That is I believe there was a right or privilege accrued to these applicants once the 1976 and 1978 legislation was passed. That was a right to apply for compensation which would have been payable on a periodic basis effective April 1, 1976. Of course, the success of an application would have depended on establishing the facts which these applicants have since done. I rely here on the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Esso Resources Canada Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue
, [1990] F.C.J. No. 340; 109 N.R. 272 (F.C.A.), where paragraph 43(c) of the
Interpretation Act
was applied. In that case, an oil producer had paid excise tax on certain natural gas liquids during the years 1983 to 1985. It was entitled by statute to apply for a refund of the tax in respect of a portion of these liquids ultimately used for tax-exempt purposes. Before it had taken any steps to apply for a refund, the statutory provisions under which the tax was payable, and which also provided for the refund of tax paid on exempt liquids, was repealed. The producers sought a refund of the taxes and was told that the refund provisions had been abolished with the tax. It was held by a Trial Judge and by the Federal Court of Appeal that the producers had an acquired right, namely the right to apply for a refund before the
Act
was repealed and therefore the repeal should not be construed to have affected that accrued right to apply for a refund. In the
Trotter
appeal before the Board this case was relied on by the applicants. The Board distinguished it by saying that the Federal Court of Appeal upheld Esso's entitlement because it "had taken legal action necessary to claim their refund. ... 'well before the repealing legislation was enacted'". (Applicant's Record, p. 159). With respect, I can find no such indication in the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal. It observed that after the repeal of the refund law "it remained for the Minister to receive an application and to grant the refund" but that was held not to preclude Esso's entitlement to the refund. (p. 5). In the present case, I believe that Mr. Trotter and Mr. Reid had acquired a right to apply for compensation effective April 1, 1976, and s. 71.2(4) and s. 39 of the
Pension Act
should not be construed to abolish that right in the absence of clear language to that effect.