 [2] 
  The relevant portions of the reasons for order explaining the adjournment include the following: 
 
 
 
 "1. In November 2003, The Ottawa Citizen Group Inc., one of its journalists Ms. Kate Jaimet and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ('the applicants') filed an application before the Honourable Célynne Dorval of the Ontario Court of Justice to terminate or vary her sealing order of January 21, 2002 in respect of the documents concerning seven search warrants ('the documents in issue'). The sealing order and the application to terminate or vary its terms were made pursuant to section 487.3 of the  
 Criminal Code 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. ... 
 
 
 
 "2. Later in November, counsel for the Attorney General of Canada was notified that the documents in issue contained 'potentially injurious information' or 'sensitive information' ('secret information') as defined in section 38 of the  
 Canada Evidence Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5. Secret information, in general terms, is information relating to international relations, national defence or national security. ... 
 
 
 
 "3.  
 In January 2004, while the section 487.3 application was still under consideration by the Ontario Court of Justice, this section 38 proceeding was initiated by the applicants for an order authorizing the disclosure of the documents in issue. ... 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "5. The hearing commenced on June 10, 2004. After further considering the documents in issue and the parties' memoranda of fact and law, the Court questioned the advisability of continuing the section 38 hearing with the parallel proceeding in the Ontario Court of Justice not yet concluded. ... 
 
 
 
 "6.  
 In my view, the application before the Federal Court was launched prematurely. Judicial economy and the scheme envisaged in section 38 support the view that the  
 Criminal Code 
  proceeding should be completed before further pursuing this application. Accordingly, an order will issue adjourning the hearing of this application sine die for the reasons that follow 
 . 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "15. In each forum, the judge will be asked to assess whether disclosure of the same documents in issue, referred to as the sealed documents in the Ontario Court of Justice and the secret information in this Court, would compromise or cause injury to the very same investigation. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "18. To repeat, the Ontario Court of Justice has all the information with no deletions. When counsel first raised the spectre of section 38, Justice Dorval was not informed specifically that the national security ground relied upon for the non-disclosure of all the secret information was the risk to one or more ongoing investigations. This was unfortunate. Also, she was not advised that a second national security ground is raised for only some of the secret information, an aspect disclosed to the applicants in this proceeding. The invocation of section 38 may have unduly sidetracked the section 487.3 hearing. 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 "22. If Justice Dorval decides to vary further her sealing order and the Attorney General of Canada continues to object to making public the information about to be disclosed, the parties would then return to the Federal Court for the completion of this hearing. 
 
 
 
 "23. Consideration of section 38 will be timely when the determination under section 487.3 has been completed. The reasons for decision would indicate which portions, if any, of the documents in issue the judge of the Ontario Court of Justice was prepared to have disclosed. The parties could then consider their positions and, if necessary, pursue their rights under section 38 before the information was made public." (Emphasis added.)