[16]
The parties agree that the duty of fairness applies to the classification grievance process. The process is a non-adversarial, administrative proceeding which does not engage rights or privileges characteristic of quasi-judicial proceedings (see
Chong et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) et al.
(1995), 104 F.T.R. 253 (T.D.), at paragraph 39). The Federal Court of Appeal held in
Chong v. Canada (Attorney General)
(1999), 236 N.R. 371 (F.C.A.), per Justice Décary that the content of the duty of fairness owed by classification grievance committees lies at the lower zone of the spectrum, and decided in
Bulat v. Canada (Treasury Board)
(2000), 252 N.R. 182 (F.C.A.), that a griever must be granted an adequate opportunity to address those issues that are central to a committee's classification decision. Writing for the Court of Appeal in
Bulat
, Justice Evans provided the following guidance at paragraphs 9 and 10:
"9. It is not disputed that the duty of fairness applies to the classification grievance process, and that a decision by the Deputy Head, or his or her nominee, adopting a recommendation of the Committee may be set aside by the Court on the ground that the Committee failed to afford the grievor a fair hearing. Further, it has been established in this Court that, given the nature of the process, the content of the duty of fairness is located 'somewhere in the lower zone of the spectrum':
Chong v. Canada (Attorney General)
(1999), 236 N.R. 371, 374 (per Décary J.A.).
"10. However, in my opinion this case does not turn on the precise location on the procedural spectrum of the content of the duty that the Committee owed to the appellant. An elementary incident of the duty of fairness is that the individual adversely affected should have an adequate opportunity to address an issue that the Committee regarded as central to the disposition of the grievance, but which the grievor did not realise was in dispute and therefore could not have been reasonably expected to anticipate, and to address."