 [12] 
  The applicant relied on several cases in support of the proposition that such internal directives have the force of law. The more salient of these cases are as follows. In  
 Gingras v. Canada 
 , [1994] 2 F.C. 734; 165 N.R. 101 (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal held that the Bilingualism Bonus Plan created an entitlement to a bilingualism bonus for those members of the Public Service coming within its definition. In that case the Plan had been adopted by the Treasury Board and was very precise. It left no discretion to departments. In its decision the Court of Appeal does not elaborate the criteria upon which it found that the Policy could support a cause of action but it so held. It appears that much turned on the language of the Bilingualism Bonus Plan. In  
 Nguyen et al. v. Minister of Employment and Immigration 
 , [1994] 1 F.C. 232; 156 N.R. 212 (F.C.A.), it was said that an administrative manual within the Department of Employment and Immigration prescribed that a person seeking entry to Canada as a sponsored relative must be given an application form to apply for landing before a sponsorship application had been dealt with. The Court found there to be such an enforceable obligation but it did not regard the manual which directed this procedure to have the force of law. Instead it found the obligation to be implied under the  
 Act 
  and the  
 Regulations 
 . In  
 Peet v. Canada (Attorney General) 
 , [1994] 3 F.C. 128; 78 F.T.R. 44 (T.D.), Reed, J., refused a motion to strike out an application to quash the decision of a deputy minister who had concluded that the applicant was in breach of the Conflict of Interest and Post-Employment Code for the Public Service. She rejected the argument that the Court had no jurisdiction because the Code is not law. It should be noted in this case that she was not dealing with a substantive issue but only the question of jurisdiction of the Court. It should also be noted that she relied on  
 Nguyen 
 , supra, interpreting it as giving legal effect to the Immigration Manual. As I have indicated I do not so interpret it. Reference was also made to two other decisions of this Court,  
 Nieboer et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) 
 , [1996] F.C.J. No. 1299; 121 F.T.R. 29 (T.D.) and  
 Vavrecka v. Canada (Attorney General) 
 , [1996] F.C.J. No. 328; 110 F.T.R. 115 (T.D.). Both of these cases involved the application of the Deployment Policy and Deployment Guidelines of Treasury Board. In both cases legal effect was given to these documents. However there was clear statutory authority for that Policy and Guidelines: s. 34.2(1) of the  
 Public Service Employment Act 
 , R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33, specifically required departments to establish deployment policies and procedures in accordance with the directives made by the Treasury Board, and Treasury Board had issued such directives.