[14]
In
Adamidis et al. v. Canada (Treasury Board)
, [2006] F.T.R. Uned. 120; 146 A.C.W.S.(3d) 278; 2006 FC 243, Justice Phelan determined on a pragmatic and functional approach that the standard to review a decision of a classification grievance committee on its merits is patent unreasonableness. I am persuaded to adopt the reasoning of Justice Phelan in material part, where he states at paragraphs 18 to 24 of
Adamidis
:
"18. In large measure, I adopt Justice Blanchard's analysis of the applicable standard of review of decisions of a classification committee in
Trépanier v. Canada (Attorney General)
, [2004] F.C.J. No. 1601; 2004 FC 1326. In that case, Justice Blanchard found the standard of review to be patent unreasonableness in respect of the calculation of a deadline to be met.
"19. With respect to the existence and nature of a private clause, s. 96(3) of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
(
Act
) provides:
'96(3) Where a grievance has been presented up to and including the final level in the grievance process and it is not one that under section 92 may be referred to adjudication, the decision on the grievance taken at the final level in the grievance process is final and binding for all purposes of this Act and no further action under this Act may be taken thereon.'
'96(3) Sauf dans le cas d'un grief qui peut être renvoyé à l'arbitrage au titre de l'article 92, la décision rendue au dernier palier de la procédure applicable en la matière est finale et obligatoire, et aucune autre mesure ne peut être prise sous le régime de la présente loi à l'égard du grief ainsi tranché.'
"20. While this may not be the strongest privative clause, it does indicate an intention to curtail further review to some extent and to ensure that a grievance decision is final and binding.
"21. Of greater importance in this case are the other three factors in the pragmatic and functional analysis -- expertise, purpose of legislation and its relevant provision, and nature of the question.
"22. If the calculation of a deadline is a purely factual matter requiring expertise, as found in
Trépanier
, then the actual application of the classification system is even more a matter of expertise. It required expertise in classification, and a thorough knowledge of the policies, procedures and organization of government employees and their functions.
"23. The purpose of the legislation is polycentric 'as it is intended to resolve questions involving contradictory policy objectives or interests of different groups, and its purpose is not just to oppose the government to the individual'.
"24. As to the fourth factor, the nature of the question is somewhat less factual than the calculation of a deadline but in this case it actively engages factors two and four together. The weighting of job functions includes knowledge of the facts of each function. More importantly, the selection of comparators is an area of expertise (much as would occur in a commercial appraisal case) and one based on expert evidence which established matters of fact. The question being asked by the Applicants is whether the Committee carried out its selection, weighting and analysis properly. This is a matter deserving of considerable deference at the patent unreasonable level of review. (See
Laplante v. Canada (Canadian Food Inspection Agency)
, [2004] F.C.J. No. 1640; 2004 FC 1345.)"