 [3] 
  The sequence of relevant events was: 
 
 
 
 (1) November 3, 1992 - recommendation by Immigration Officer Mary Mammoliti that the applicant's marriage was not bona fide and that her request for permanent residence from within Canada based on the marriage be refused. This recommendation was based on separate interviews with the applicant and her husband and on material in the case file. 
 
 
 
 (2) November 3, 1992 - decision of Paul Hind, A/Area Manager Mississauga Hearing CIC based on the recommendation of Mary Mammoliti that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to warrant processing the applicant's request for permanent residence from within Canada. 
 
 
 
 (3) June 21, 1993 - recommendation by Immigration Officer Doug Allen that nothing had occurred since the November 3, 1992 review that convinced him that the marriage was bona fide. This recommendation was based on a review of the case file including Ms. Mammoliti's recommendation and submissions on behalf of the applicant. No interview was conducted. 
 
 
 
 (4) July 14, 1993 - decision of Michael J. Finnerty, A/Area Manager Toronto Hearing CIC based on the recommendation of Doug Allen that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate and public policy grounds to warrant the applicant's application to process her permanent residence application from within Canada. [see footnote 1] 
 
   
 
 Counsel for the respondent submits that the substance of the applicant's judicial review application pertains to the recommendation of Immigration Officer Mary Mammoliti, dated November 3, 1992 and her failure to confront the applicant with apparent contradictions and negative file information so that they might be explained. Respondent's counsel points out that in this judicial review, the applicant does not seek to review Ms. Mammoliti's recommendation but rather the decision of Mr. Finnerty. He says that the application is brought some ten months after Ms. Mammoliti's recommendation and is out of time.