 [14] 
  I have carefully reviewed the sections of the  
 Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act 
  cited by the applicant in his notice of appli­cation, and nowhere in these sections does the Superintendent or the Receiver have an affirmative duty to act in a way demanded by the applicant. For example, paragraphs 5(3)(e) and (f) read: 
 
 
 
 "(3) The Superintendent shall, without limiting the authority conferred by subsec­tion (2), 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 (e) from time to time make or cause to be made such inspection or investigation of estates or other matters to which this Act applies, including the conduct of a trustee or a trustee acting as a receiver or interim receiver,  
 as the Superintendent may deem expedient 
  and for the purpose of the inspection or investigation the Superintendent or any person appointed by the Superintendent for the purpose shall have access to and the right to examine and make copies of all books, records, data, including data in electronic form, documents and papers pertaining or relating to any estate or other matter to which this Act applies; 
 
 
 
 (f) receive and keep a record of all com­plaints from any creditor or other person interested in any estate and make such specific investigations with regard to such complaints  
 as the Superintendent may determine 
 ; and ..." (emphasis by underlining is here added) 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 "(3) Le surintendant, sans que soit limitée l'autorité que lui confère le paragraphe (2): 
 
 
 
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
 e) effectue ou fait effectuer les investigations ou les enquêtes, au sujet des actifs et autres affaires régies par la présente loi, et notamment la conduite des syndics agissant à ce titre ou comme séquestres ou séquestres intérimaires,  
 qu'il peut juger opportunes et 
 , aux fins de celles-ci, lui-même ou la personne qu'il nomme à cet effet a accès, outre aux données sur support électronique ou autre, à tous livres, registres, documents ou papiers se rattachant ou se rapportant à un actif ou à toute autre affaire régie par la présente loi, et a droit de les examiner et d'en tirer des copies; 
 
 
 
 f) reçoit et note toutes les plaintes émanant d'un créancier ou d'une autre personne intéressée dans un actif, et effectue, au sujet de ces plaintes,  
 les investigations précises qu'il peut déterminer 
 ;" 
 
 
 
 The introductory language of s-s. 5(3) appears mandatory, but the investigations referred to in paragraphs (e) and (f) reflect a wide grant of discretion, vested in the Superintendent, as the Superintendent "may deem expedient" or "as the Superintendent may determine". No duty to act arises under these provisions. If the Superintendent is not of the opinion that an investigation is expedient, the Court would not order an investigation. Generally similar comments, that actions of the Superintendent are discretionary, are applicable in relation to the other sections of the  
 Act 
 , that is, the other paragraphs of s. 5, and ss. 6, 10, 11, 12, 13.3, 13.4 and 13.5, referred to by the applicant as the bases for the application. 
 
