 [5] 
  The following are the factual findings the Officer made: 
 
 
 
 "The claimant testified that starting 2001, Silva regularly sexually harassed, beat and attempted to rape her when he began to cohabit with the claimant's mother when they lived in Juiz de Fora in Minas Gervais. In 2001, the claimant telephoned the police once and they came to the house, but spoke only to Silva and not with the claimant. She testified that because Silva is a retired colonel and a wealthy farmer, who was friendly with the authorities, no further action was taken by the police. Allegedly, the unwelcome sexual assaults continued, but the claimant never sought protection again although Silva continued his harassment unabated for years, until early 2004 when she moved to Sao Paulo, a distance of 600 km. from her former home. After several months, in August 2004, Silva came to Sao Paulo and attempted to rape and assaulted the claimant, but she was able to escape. The claimant reported this incident to the police in Sao Paulo and was given access to psychological counselling and medical support,  
 but despite years of alleged abuse she never sought or required medical treatment 
 . After this August 2004 incident, the claimant spoke to the police a second time in August, and once in September. When the claimant reported to the designated Police Station for the Defence of Women where they told her that they would check into Silva's background and take some action. This special station referred her to two non-governmental organizations (NGO), 'Pro Women' where they did a psychological report and 'Women's United' where she received additional psychological support. The last time that the claimant saw Silva was in September 2004, when she came out of hiding from her friend's house to visit her apartment where he was waiting outside and he pounded on her door. The incident was never reported because the claimant planned to travel abroad. She travelled to Canada two months after Silva followed her to Sao Paulo and after her first report to the authorities in that province. On October 9, 2004, the claimant travelled to Canada where she claimed refugee protection after several weeks. 
 
 
 
 " 
 The claimant testified that she was unable to obtain any documentation related to her police reports in Sao Paulo, to the police, or the NGOs and she never sought medical attention 
 ." (Emphasis added) (Tribunal Decision, pp. 2-3)