 [21] 
  The decision in  
 Kadenko 
  deals with a claim of protection arising from evidence of discrimination and intolerance in Israel against Russian-speaking claimants. In setting aside the Refugee Division's decision rejecting the claim for protection, the reviewing judge certified the following question for consideration by the Court of Appeal: 
 
 
 
 "Where there has not been a complete breakdown of the governmental apparatus and where a State has political and judicial institutions capable of protecting its citizens, does the refusal by certain police officers to take action suffice to establish that the State in question is unable or unwilling to protect its nationals?" 
 
 
 
 The Court of Appeal answered the question in the negative and, in doing so, made these statements: 
 
 
 
 "In our view, the question as worded must be answered in the negative. Once it is assumed that the state (Israel in this case) has political and judicial institutions capable of protecting its citizens, it is clear that the refusal of certain police officers to take action cannot in itself make the state incapable of doing so. The answer might have been different if the question had related, for example, to the refusal by the police as an institution or to a more or less general refusal by the police force to provide the protection conferred by the country's political and judicial institutions. 
 
 
 
 "In short, the situation implied by the question under consideration recalls the following comments by Hugessen, J.A., in  
 Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) v. Villafranca 
  (1992), 150 N.R. 232, at p. 233, 99 D.L.R.(4th) 334 (F.C.A.): 
 
 
 
 'No government that makes any claim to democratic values or protection of human rights can guarantee the protection of all its citizens at all times. Thus, it is not enough for a claimant merely to show that his government has not always been effective at protecting persons in his particular situation.' 
 
 
 
 "When the state in question is a democratic state, as in the case at bar, the claimant must do more than simply show that he or she went to see some members of the police force and that his or her efforts were unsuccessful.  
 The burden of proof that rests on the claimant is, in a way, directly proportional to the level of democracy in the state in question: the more democratic the state's institutions, the more the claimant must have done to exhaust all the courses of action open to him or her  
 (See  
 Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration) v. Satiacum 
  (1989), 99 N.R. 171, at p. 176 (F.C.A.), approved by  
 Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward 
 , [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689, at p. 725, 103 D.L.R.(4th) 1.)" (Emphasis added)