[36]
In a unanimous decision, Linden, J.A., writing for the Federal Court of Appeal, distinguished the facts of
Grewal
from those of
Kaur
and
Mattia
(at 171-172):
"In
Kaur v. M.E.I.
, supra, it was held that a constitutional exemption may be granted in appropriate circumstances, pursuant to which an inquiry may be reopened. This will be done if the situation is 'manifestly unfair', to use Mr. Justice Heald's words, or 'remarkable', to use the language of Madam Justice Desjardins in
Kaur
, supra, at p. 324 and 334, following Grange, J.A., in
Seaboyer v. R.
(1987), 61 O.R. 290 (Ont. C.A.) (affirmed on other grounds by S.C.C. Aug. 22, 1991). This court has held in the past, pursuant to the
Charter
, that inquiries may be reopened where it would be a denial of fundamental justice not to do so. Thus, it has been held that where a person failed to make a refugee claim at the time of the inquiry because of duress (
Kaur v. M.E.I.
, supra) or because of mental disability (
Mattia v. M.E.I.
, [1987] 3 F.C. 492), an inquiry may be reopened. If there is a denial of natural justice during the original inquiry, the Board could treat its earlier decision as a nullity and reopen it in order to avoid the denial of fundamental justice. (
Longia v. M.E.I.
(1990), 10 Imm. L.R.(2d) 312 (F.C.A.)) Moreover, an extension of time to apply for a redetermination beyond the rigid limits prescribed by the
Immigration Act
may also be required by section 7 (
Bains v. M.E.I.
(1989), 8 Imm. L.R. 165 (F.C.A.)).
"In the circumstances of this case, therefore, have the section 7 rights of the applicant been violated? Unlike the applicants before the court in
Mattia
and
Kaur
, the applicant does not point to the original hearing itself to demonstrate the unfairness of his situation. There were no circumstances at the time of the original hearing which denied him fundamental justice. What the applicant points to are circumstances which arose
after
the time of the original hearing which he argues he should be allowed to place before a reopened inquiry in order to have his section 7 rights respected."