[24]
But, what if the proper sum to be assessed pursuant to s. 6(9) be inadequate to compensate the plaintiffs for their undeserved loss? Is the claim to [be] assessed under the Act subsumed within a broader claim in tort against the defendants? Or, does the operation of s. 6(9) exclude any tort claim? The Appeal Division of this court seemed to believe, in obiter dictum, that the claim is not one in tort. In the case of Canadian Saltfish Corporation v. Rasmussen et al., above cited, the panel, speaking through the Chief Justice of that time, wrote this:
"Martland, J. [in Conseil des Ports Nationaux c. Langlier et al., [1969] S.C.R. 60], summed up the position as follows [at pages 74-75]:
'But as already stated there was always recourse in the common law courts in respect of acts done, without legal justification, by an agent of the Crown, and the Board, on that principle, is liable if it commits itself, or orders or authorizes its servants to commit, an act done without legal justification.'
"That, in my opinion, is the law and the only law on which the appellant [the Canadian Saltfish Corporation] can be held liable for the conversion alleged in the statement of claim. It is the law of the province of Newfoundland and in no way federal law. Federal Crown law is not involved. And while liability of the Crown, for the alleged tort of the appellant, may arise under the Crown Liability Act, that of the appellant will not. Nor will it arise under section 14 of the Saltfish Act or any like provision. It seems to me to follow that the court has no federal law to administer in respect of the claim against the appellant and that the court is without jurisdiction to entertain it. See Quebec North Shore Paper Co. et al. v. Canadian Pacific Ltd. et al., [1977] 2 S.C.R. 1054 and McNamara Construction (Western) Ltd. et al. v. The Queen, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 654.
"In so far as the claim for the proceeds of sale of the fish can be based on subsection 6(9) of the Coastal Fisheries Protection Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-21, it appears to me that there is federal law to support the jurisdiction of the court but, in my opinion, such a claim is not one in tort. It is, as it seems to me, simply a situation in which property of a person is in the hands of the Crown and the only jurisdiction of this court to entertain a proceeding for its recovery is that conferred by section 17 of the Federal Court Act which, as I have already indicated, does not authorize an action against an agency of the Crown but only against the Crown eo nomine."