[32]
Upon an application for certiorari to quash that judge's order, the Crown relied on the provisions of s. 58(3) which enact that seized fish subject to spoilage may be sold "in such manner
and for such price
[as the person having custody thereof] may determine". Crown counsel also submitted that the Fisheries Act and particularly s. 58, are a complete statutory code respecting seizure and return of property by fisheries officers. It was further asserted that Mrs. McRae was entitled only to the one dollar being the same sum - "the proceeds of a sale" - received from the disposition of the salmon. Clearly the authority to deal administratively with an individual's property carries with it the duty to deal fairly. Here is some of what was written by Wallace, J., in his reasons for judgment in the McRae case:
"The fact that Parliament has seen fit to delegate the decision as to the appropriate terms of sale of the seized fish to the sole discretion of the officer does not negate the duty of fairness. It does have a bearing on the nature of the procedural protection appropriate for this particular decision.
"At the very least, this 'duty of fairness' would require the officer to make every reasonable effort to obtain as close to the market value as possible for property being sold, if it had a market value, and if not, the best possible price in the light of the prevailing circumstances. What occurred here, of course, was not a 'sale' but a donation of articles, having a value of many hundreds of dollars, to a community service orgainzation, a procedure not contemplated, or authorized, by s. 58 of the Fisheries Act. (D.L.R. page 425)
. . . . .
"The fisheries officer ... seized all the fish owned by Rita McRae, when the legal objective of the seizure would have been completely satisfied if only two fish had been seized; the fisheries officer, following what I consider to be an unjustified Department policy, deprived Mrs. McRae of her property, improperly giving it away, offering her one ($ 1) dollar as compensation; that Mrs. McRae has now been improperly deprived of her property for two years without due process of law. There is no suggestion she has committed any offence.
"Almost a full year after the charge was laid the Crown stayed the proceedings against her and the Department of Fisheries offered Mrs. McRae $1 as full compensation for her property, thereby imposing an unauthorized punishment upon a citizen against whom they did not intend to proceed with charges.
. . . . .
"Crown counsel submitted that if Rita McRae was dissatisfied with the $1 compensation she must sue in Federal Court for any additional compensation to which she considers she is entitled and thereby be required to incur further months of delay, costs and the continual deprivation of her property.
"The only justification advanced for the fisheries officer's actions in giving away the property of Rita McRae, and for refusing compensation, is the stated 'policy' of the Department of Fisheries and that Department's interpretation of the provisions of s. 58(3) of the Fisheries Act." (D.L.R. page 427)
In the result, Wallace, J., declined to quash the provincial judge's order of restitution in kind. The decision surely stands for the proposition, which this court adopts, that the Crown's tendering of "proceeds" which are inadequate, does not at all deprive the owner of the fish from claiming the full, fair value of his fish which were converted through sale of them by the defendants. Payment of less than the full value would accord the Crown an unjust enrichment in these circumstances.