[14]
The applicant maintained that the reason he fabricated this entire story was because of a Palestinian friend who had given him bad advice, apparently at the suggestion of his former adviser. He was also ill and upset. Accordingly, there was one lie after another as the hearings proceeded. However, it is best to allow the applicant to explain:
[Translation] "First let me begin by apologizing, because it began in a way I did not intend. First, the story I already mentioned before, it was not I who wrote it, it was a friend I knew here. He was a Palestinian and I told him in general what happened with me and then I was somewhat confused in my affairs and so on. He wrote the story for me and then I realized that it was not really ... it did not make any sense that I agreed to use this story like that, but I was really - I had no choice because it began like that, and then after that ...
. . . . .
"On my arrival here I was ill, I was upset. I went through a period of anxiety and then with pressure and everything. I did not understand that it did not make good sense to file such a story anyway and I continued thinking that it could help me and then I would not return to Tunisia, because I was afraid to return.
. . . . .
"Because I presented my story to ... Ms. Ntap, my adviser, my former adviser before, and he read the story, then he said it was a religious story and here in Canada, everyone who is a refugee has a religious story, they are automatically considered Islamists, and then she said, she told me that according to her experience in the field everyone is considered as a sympathizer of El-Nahda, and in any case I said that no matter what I would be a sympathizer of El-Nahda. Then, she told me to answer yes if they ask me if I know someone. I took this idea and I searched on the Internet, I found in the chat, a chat room on the Internet, a Tunisian political forum, and then I met someone, who gave me the alleged office number of Rachid Ghanouchi, and I used that to fabricate the story by saying that I knew that member of El-Nahda. Nothing more: that is the whole bare truth." (Transcript of hearing of January 15, 2003, panel's record, pp. 1733, 1735 and 1738-39)