[19]
Before turning to the evidence presented in connection with this application, it will be useful to review cases dealing with s. 225.2 or its predecessor that are relevant. I was referred to only one reported case dealing with s. 225.2 as it now is, Deputy Minister of National Revenue v. Vanwert and Wilma Atchison (1988), 89 D.T.C. 5088 (B.C.S.C.). There, Mr. Justice Sheppard allowed applications to set aside ex parte orders previously made under s. 225.2(2), in part because on review he concluded the Crown was not justified in making the original ex parte application as he found it had not made full disclosure with respect to allegations made in support of the application (i.e. a flaw in the original application), and in part because he was not satisfied that the Crown had met the test established by the statute in s. 225.2(2). I agree with Sheppard, J., that this test is the same as that enunciated by Mr. Justice McNair in Danielson v. Minister of National Revenue, [1986] D.T.C. 6518, at 6519; [1986] 2 C.T.C. 380, at 381; 7 F.T.R. 42, at 44 (F.C.T.D.), with reference to the earlier s. 225.2(1):
"... the issue is not whether the collection per se is in jeopardy but rather whether the actual jeopardy arises from the likely delay in the collection thereof."
In introducing that test in Danielson, McNair, J., also commented:
"In my judgment, the issue goes to the matter of collection jeopardy by reason of the delay normally attributable to the appeal process. The wording of subs. 225.1(1) would seem to indicate that it is necessary to show that because of the passage of time involved in an appeal the taxpayer would become less able to pay the amount assessed.
"In my opinion, the fact that the taxpayer was unable to pay the amount assessed at the time of the direction would not, by itself, be conclusive or determinative. Moreover, the mere suspicion or concern that delay may jeopardize collection would not be sufficient per se. The test of 'whether it may reasonably be considered' is susceptible of being reasonably translated into the test of whether the evidence on balance of probability is sufficient to lead to the conclusion that it is more likely than not that collection would be jeopardized by delay.
"Cogent evidence on the part of the Minister as to the dissipation of the taxpayer's assets or the movement of assets out of the jurisdiction beyond the reach of the Department of National Revenue and other potential creditors could be very persuasive and compelling. A more difficult borderline case might be the situation where the taxpayer's assets are of a wasting nature, or likely to decline in value with the mere passage of time.
"What of the case where the taxpayer has little, if anything, in the way of assets? Is the inability to pay the amount assessed sufficient justification, without more, to enable the Minister to successfully invoke subs. 225.2(1)? I think not."