 [24] 
  Although the Federal Court has stated that short security detentions do not always constitute persecution, it nevertheless held that the particular circumstances of each case have to be considered. Commenting on a finding by the Refugee Protection Board quite similar to that of the PRRA officer in the present case, Justice O'Reilly had this to say in  
 Murugamoorthy v. 
   
 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , 2003 FC 1114: 
 
 
 
 [3] The Board analyzed this part of her claim with reference to case law from this Court. It purported to quote from that jurisprudence when it said: "The Federal Court Trial Division ...outlined that 'short detentions for the purpose of preventing disruptions or dealing with terrorism do not constitute persecution'". 
 
 
 
 [...] 
 
 
 
 [6] It appears to me that the Board has reduced its understanding of the case law to the brief formulation set out above. The same statement appears in numerous decisions of the Board (see, for example,  
 Q.W.T. (Re) 
 , [2002] C.R.D.D. No. 15, at para. 17). This formulation derives from  
 Brar 
  and  
 Mahaligam 
  but, since  
 Thirunavukkarasu 
 , those cases are of questionable authority. I believe the correct approach is set out in  
 Velluppillai 
   
 v. 
   
 Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) 
 , [2000] F.C.J. No. 301, (QL) (T.D.), at para. 15. There, Justice Gibson agreed that, in general, short detentions for legitimate law enforcement purposes did not constitute persecution. However, the Board must go on to consider the particular circumstances of the applicant - including factors such as the person's age and prior experiences - in deciding whether he or she was persecuted. The Board failed to do so in Ms. Murugamoorthy's case. 
 
 
 
 [7] 
  Therefore, in my view, the Board erred when it stated that short-term arrests for security reasons cannot be considered persecution, even when they are carried out, as here, in a discriminatory way. The Board specifically acknowledged that the Sri Lankan authorities discriminate against the Tamil population and found that, indeed, the police had discriminated against Ms. Murugamoorthy. 
 
