[26]
Section 53 of the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. E-13, as amended, provided:
"53(1) The Minister may certify that any tax, penalty, interest or other sum payable under this Act has not been paid as and when required by this Act.
"(2) On production to the Federal Court, a certificate made under this section shall be registered in the Court and, when registered, has the same force and effect, and all proceedings may be taken thereon, as if the certificate were a judgment obtained in the Court for a debt of the amount specified in the certificate."
(Section 53 came into force on May 1, 1986 by S.C. 1986, c. 9, s. 40. This provision is now R.S.C. 1985, c. E-15, s. 83. During the period August 1, 1985 to April 30, 1986, the certification provision was section 52(4), which came into force on June 1, 1985 and which provided:
"52(4) Any amount payable in respect of taxes, penalties and interest under this Act, other than Part I, remaining unpaid in whole or in part after fifteen days from the date of the sending, by registered or certified letter, of a notice of arrears addressed to the licensed air carrier, taxpayer or person licensed for the purposes of Part II.1, as the case may be, may be certified by the Deputy Minister of National Revenue for Customs and Excise and on the production to the Federal Court or a judge thereof or such officer as the Court or a judge thereof may direct, the certificate shall be registered in that Court and shall, from the date of such registration, be of the same force and effect, and all proceedings may be taken thereon, as if the certificate were a judgment obtained in that Court for the recovery of a debt of the amount specified in the certificate, including penalties and interest to the date of payment as provided for in this Act, and entered upon the date of such registration, and all reasonable costs and charges attendant upon the registration of such certificate are recoverable in like manner as if they were part of such judgment.")