[76]
On the other hand, the submission of the applicant, that judicial review of the exercise of discretion is warranted or CHRC dismissals of complaints each time that, in the opinion of the reviewing court, the complainant took his [or her] case out of the realm of conjecture, goes too far the other way. Counsel for the applicant brought to my attention the case of
Onischak v. British Columbia (Council of Human Rights)
(1989), 10 C.H.R.R. D/6290 (B.C.S.C.), in support this submission. The
Onischak
, Huddart, J., relied on the test set out by Woods, J., in the case of
Cook v. British Columbia (Council of Human Rights)
(1988), 26 B.C.L.R.(2d) 52 (S.C.), in dismissing a complaint of discrimination based on alleged refusal to consider the complainant for a job as a probation officer due to the fact that he was visually impaired and did not hold a valid driver's licence. According to Huddart, J. (at D/6293):
"In view of the provisions of s. 12, any review of the question as to whether or not an investigation had been 'completed' necessarily involves an examination of the exercise of the council's discretion. The legislature has entrusted the responsibility to deal with human rights to the council, a specialized body, uniquely qualified to make the assessment as to whether to discontinue proceedings, recommend a settlement, submit a report to the minister or designate one of its members to hear written or oral submissions, as that member specifies, after an inquiry of whatever nature and extent it determines to be appropriate to the circumstances. In these circumstances the only question is whether or not the council acted patently unreasonably in exercising it discretion.
"What is patently unreasonable will depend on the circumstances of each case. The evidence uncovered by the investigation was insufficient to raise the inference of discrimination based on physical disability. Evidence was obtained that the decision to disqualify Mr. Onischak from the employment competition was based solely on facts unrelated to physical disability. In these circumstances it was not patently unreasonable for the council to conclude the investigation and order that the proceedings be discontinued without further inquiry and further response to the complainant."