[7]
In the case of the Applicants, Xiang Zhou and Chao Yuan Lin in IMM-1061-18, an additional argument was advanced that the s 44 referral process employed against them constituted an abuse of process because the misrepresentation allegations could and should have been raised in the context of earlier admissibility hearings dealing with their residency obligations [see CTR in IMM-1061-18 at pp 755-758].  This argument was rejected in the case of Mr. Lin for the following reasons:
By signing and submitting an Application for a Permanent Resident Card Mr. LIN is responsible for its’ contents as by signing he makes a declaration as to the truthfulness of the information in the application. By signing Mr. LIN also declares he understands all the information in the application and also understands false statements or concealment of material facts may be grounds for his prosecution or removal. The submissions alleges the misrepresentation was committed by the “crooked” consultant he had hired and that he is a victim of this consultatnt [sic] and the activities he undertook. It is established in case law that misrepresentation can be committed by another person without one’s knowledge as per Goudarzi v. Canada, 2012 FC 425.
Mr. LIN had successfully appealed a decision made by the Mission in Beijing regarding residency obligations. Mr. LIN had been refused a Travel Document (Permanent Resident Abroad) as the Officer came to the decision Mr. LIN did not fulfill his residency obligations. On 28 September 2015 the Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB) – Immigration Appeal Division (IAD) set aside the Officer’s decision and found Mr. LIN had not lost his permanent resident status. During this proceeding the issue that was dealt with may have been touched upon during the IAD appeal however the main issue was the Mission’s decision to refuse to issue Mr. LIN a Travel Document from a previous application due to his alleged failure to meet residency obligations. The issue currently being dealt with is that of misrepresentation on a Permanent Resident Card Application and a Section 44 report pursuant to Section 40(1)(a) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) had not been written previous to that appeal. Regardless of whether Mr. LIN met residency requirements or qualified under one of the options regarding residency obligations, the fact is Mr. LIN had submitted a fraudulent travel history in his Application for a Permanent Resident Card dated 28 March 2013.