[8]
In response to this request by the security officers, Mr. Lynch organized a meeting in November 1995 together with Ms. Séguin, a representative of Human Resources. During this meeting, which was conducted on a voluntary basis, the eight security officers present filled out a questionnaire designed to determine their degree of satisfaction with their work environment, the performance evaluations made by the applicant and the employees' morale. All in all, the comments made concerning the applicant's management are rather negative, and the most serious ones were filed at the hearing before the adjudicator:
"... When Mr. Gauthier is around there is a lot of undue pressure. In such a state, officers could be pushed or trapped into making wrong moves when reacting to a situation. This could prove to be very dangerous.
"... I don't know who we are working for, I am not sure if it is for Brendan (MURPHY - T.S.S.), or Michel. There is a lot of bickering between Michel and Brendan. Brendan appears to be responsible for the matrix system and whenever there is an action (change on it ???), Michel fights it all the way. The security officers are caught between Michel and Brendan!
"... I agree that the working environment is problematic. Michel's leadership tends to put everyone against each other. It seems that Michel feels if the officers are against each other they will be more open and the comments will get back to him. (Sounds like the divide and rule principle to me! - DLL)
"... He (Michel) has made it clear that he does not like ex-policemen or military and as such does not listen to my ideas.
"... I don't appreciate some of the comments Mr. Gauthier makes, (i.e.), we would train monkeys on the console. I don't believe I should be compared to a monkey.
"... the group of twelve officers that form the other camp get along well with each other and work primarily with little or no supervision.
"... he (Michel) is not receptive of advice, no matter what is asked he will do the opposite. If we want something now we will give him the wrong answer or advice, and he will then give us the opposite or what we wanted in the first place.
"... here at MAOC the Manager is not respected as an individual. A lot of this may stem from the fact he does not have a police or military background.
"... I believe Michel has the will to do a lot of stuff, but I also think that he is stalled by Head Office.
"... there sometimes appears to be too many chiefs and not enough Indians ... [my note: indication that everyone wants to run the show and it is difficult for Michel to achieve results under these conditions]."