[6]
Before I turn to the issues which this application raises, I will set out the relevant provisions
of
Canadian Forces Administration Order
("
CFAO
") 15 - 7, which deal with obligatory service. These provisions read as follows:
"
CFAO-15-7
"2. In this order:
obligatory service
means that period of time, prescribed by the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS), that a member must serve after having attended a course on full-time paid duty and during which the member shall not be released on request under Item 4 of the Table to Article 15.01 of Q.R.&O., unless there are special and unforeseen circumstances.
"11. The duration of a period of obligatory service following a course is dependent upon the length of the course and the needs of the Service. Unless otherwise specified, obligatory service is calculated on the basis of two months' service for each month of training. To maintain CF effectiveness, the minimum period of obligatory service is 12 months. The maximum period of obligatory service that can be incurred for any one course or series of courses leading to a specific qualification is 60 months. Postgraduate training on scholarship and the ROTP are two separate training plans, and in the case where the former immediately follows the latter, the total obligatory service is not restricted to 60 months. Periods of obligatory service are extended by any period of leave without pay which has been authorized while a member is serving an obligatory period of service.
"13. Normally a member is not permitted to incur an additional period of obligatory service prior to the completion of a previously incurred period of such service, Requests for exception should be included in the application for the training in question and directed to the Director General Military Careers (DGMC). Where such an additional period of obligatory service is incurred prior to a member completing a previously incurred period of service, the total obligatory period of service then in effect is the sum of the unexpired portion of the first period plus the second period of service. A member cannot concurrently incur and serve obligatory service. Where more than one period of obligatory service is incurred, the total period, calculated as above, shall be served consecutively commencing the day the second period of training is completed. A member will not be selected for subsidized training when the period of obligatory service to be incurred as a result of such training would extend beyond the date on which the member will acquire a statutory right of release. In some circumstances however, it will be possible for a member to convert his or her terms of service so that the date the member acquires a statutory right of release will be extended to a date following the anticipated completion date of a period of obligatory service."
[Tab CFAO 15-7
ANNEX A
PERIODS OF OBLIGATORY SERVICE REQUIRED OF MEMBERS WHO HAVE ATTENDED A COURSE OF INSTRUCTION AT PUBLIC EXPENSE AS PRESCRIBED BY THE CDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH Q.R.&O. 15.07
Serial
Class of Member
Type of Training
Period of Service Required
9.
Officers taking postgraduate training (PGT)(CFAO-9-33)
a. Postgraduate courses on scholarship immediately following graduation from a subsidized undergraduate training plan (ROTP, UTPLNCM, UTPO);
a. Two months' service for each month of training to a maximum of 60 months commencing the date postgraduate training is completed. CFAO 15-7, paragraph 13 applies with respect to multiple periods of obligatory service;