 [17] 
  I addressed the question of a duty of candour upon an applicant for a patent in dealing with the Patent Office in  
 G.D. Searle & Co. v. Novopharm Ltd. 
 , [2008] 1 F.C.R. 477, reversed on other grounds, [2008] 1 F.C.R. 529. I wrote at paragraphs 71 to 73: 
 
 
 
 71 Since at least 60 years ago there has been a doctrine of good faith in respect of patents. President Thorson of the Exchequer Court in Minerals Separation North American Corporation v. Noranda Mines Ltd., [1947] Ex. C.R. 306, at page 317, said that the inventor must act uberrimae fide and give all information known to him that will enable the invention to be carried out to the best effect as contemplated by him. 
 
 
 
 72 A patent is a monopoly sought voluntarily by an applicant, there is no compulsion to do so. An application for a patent is effectively an ex parte proceeding, only the applicant and the Patent Office examiner are involved in dialogue. The patent, when issued, is afforded a presumption of validity by the Patent Act. 
 
 
 
 73 A patent is not issued simply to afford a member of the public an opportunity to challenge its validity (see e.g. by way of analogy to revenue legislation Kingstreet Investments Ltd. v. New Brunswick (Finance), [2007] 1 S.C.R. 3, at paragraph 54). An obligation arises on those seeking to gain a patent to act in good faith when dealing with the Patent Office. The application for the patent includes a specification and draft claims. The specification is the disclosure for which the monopoly defined by the claims is granted. This disclosure, as the Supreme Court has said, should be full, frank and fair. Further disclosure made in dialogue with the Patent Office examiner. Since at least October 1, 1996, communications with the examiner must be made in good faith. It is to be expected that there will be full, frank and fair disclosure. There is afforded during the prosecution ample opportunity to make further disclosure or to correct an earlier misstatement or shortcoming. It is not harsh or unreasonable, if after the patent issues, and disclosure is found to lack good faith, that the Court deems the application and thus the patent, to have been abandoned. 
