[1]
MacKay, J.
: The applicant seeks judicial review of a decision of an adjudicator to issue an exclusion order and a deportation order against him, both issued at the conclusion of an inquiry on January 17, 1995.
[2]
The applicant, Neal John Dance, is a citizen of the United Kingdom, from England, who entered Canada as a visitor in 1988. Here he met and married a Canadian citizen and in 1989 he applied for landing as a permanent resident, sponsored by his wife. At the time of that application he and his wife were interviewed and he reported that he had been convicted of a criminal offence of possession of stolen property while in England. He had been sentenced and completed his sentence in 1987. From 1989 to 1991 the applicant held a Minister's Permit to remain in Canada and thereafter he continued to hold employment permits, the latest of which expires in October 1995.
[3]
For a time the applicant and his wife lived in Quebec where he made a further application for permanent residence in that province. When he was advised that the province was unwilling to process his application because of the conviction in England in 1987, he and his wife moved back to Ontario. In February 1993 he was informed that his application for extension of a Minister's Permit had been denied but he was issued an employment authorization valid for a year, to February 1994. By further letter dated March 18, 1993, he was informed that his application from within Canada for permanent resident status was being processed and that would take approximately 24 to 36 months to complete.
[4]
In July 1991 the applicant and his wife took a trip to Jamaica and in April 1994 they took a trip to the Bahamas. On each occasion they encountered no immigration difficulties upon return to Canada. In September 1994 the applicant went to England to visit family briefly. On his return he was examined by immigration officials at Pearson Airport who found that he was not in possession of a Visitor's Visa or a Minister's Permit. Upon checking by a computer information system, the immigration officer concerned learned of his past criminal conviction in England, which Mr. Dance had already reported to immigration officials five years before on his application for permanent residence. At the airport he was referred to a senior immigration officer who issued a report under s. 20(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the "
Act
") which indicated that the applicant had tried to come into Canada as an immigrant but was not admissible pursuant to s. 19(2)(d) because he had not complied with s. 9(1) of the
Act
requiring that an immigrant apply for and obtain a visa before appearing at a port of entry. The report by the senior immigration officer also made reference to his previous conviction in England and to the fact that, although more than five years had elapsed since the termination of his sentence, he had not satisfied the Minister that he had rehabilitated himself. For this reason he was reported as inadmissible on a second ground, in accord with s. 19(2)(a.1)(i) of the
Act
.
[5]
By affidavit the applicant admits that he was aware from previous correspondence that his conviction in England was a matter of some concern to immigration authorities in connection with his application for permanent resident status, but he had never previously been informed that he was required to satisfy the Minister that he had rehabilitated himself.
[6]
In September 1994, after completing his report, the immigration officer admitted the applicant to Canada but he was advised that an inquiry would be held concerning the matters reported.
[7]
Subsequently, in early October, 1994 the applicant re-submitted an application earlier made in July, but then with an error, for a further extension of his employment authorization and that was issued to him October 25, 1994, valid for a year. That document notes that his application for permanent resident status was in process.
[8]
In November 1994 and January 1995, counsel on behalf of the applicant made requests for forms necessary to apply for Ministerial approval of his rehabilitation and on more than one occasion counsel was advised that the process for approval of rehabilitation, in practice, was initiated by the Minister's Office which would contact an immigration officer to arrange an interview with him. No request for an interview or any other advice from the Minister's Office, or from his department, about the matter was ever received by the applicant.
[9]
The inquiry to consider the report of the senior immigration officer under s. 20 was scheduled and held on January 17, 1995. At the conclusion of that inquiry the adjudicator determined that the applicant was a person as described in the allegations of the senior immigration officer and that he was not admissible to Canada. Under the
Act
the adjudicator in those circumstances is directed by s. 32(5)(b) to issue an exclusion order in respect of his failure to comply with a visa requirement and further, is directed by s. 32(5)(a) to issue a deportation order in respect of the criminal conviction where the applicant has not established that he has satisfied the Minister that he is rehabilitated.
[10]
Relevant sections of the
Immigration Act
include the following:
"8(1) Where a person seeks to come into Canada, the burden of proving that that person has a right to come into Canada or that his admission would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations rests on that person.
"(2) Every person seeking to come into Canada shall be presumed to be an immigrant until that person satisfies the immigration officer examining him or the adjudicator presiding at his inquiry that he is not an immigrant.
"9(1) Except in such cases as are prescribed, and subject to subs. (1.1), every immigrant and visitor shall make an application for and obtain a visa before that person appears at a port of entry.
. . . . .
"19(2) No immigrant and, except as provided in subs. (3), no visitor shall be granted admission if the immigrant or visitor is a member of any of the following classes:
(a.1) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe
(i) have been convicted outside Canada of an offence that, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence that may be punishable by way of indictment under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years, or
(ii) have committed outside Canada an act or omission that constitutes an offence under the laws of the place where the act or omission occurred and that, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence that may be punishable by way of indictment under any Act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years.
except persons who have satisfied the Minister that they have rehabilitated themselves and that at least five years have elapsed since the expiration of any sentence imposed for the offence or since the commission of the act or omission, as the case may be.
. . . . .
(d) persons who cannot or do not fulfil or comply with any of the conditions or requirements of this Act or the regulations or any orders or directions lawfully made or given under this Act or the regulations.
. . . . .
"32(5) Where an adjudicator decides that a person who is the subject of an inquiry is a person who, at the time of the person's examination, was seeking admission and is a member of an inadmissible class, the adjudicator shall, subject to subs. 32.1(3),
(a) make a deportation order against that person, if that person is a member of an inadmissible class described in paragraph 19(1)(c), (c.1), (c.2), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (k) or (l) or 19(2)(a) (a.1) or (b); or
(b) make an exclusion order against that person, if that person is a member of an inadmissible class other than an inadmissible class referred to in paragraph (a)."
[11]
When this matter came on for hearing counsel for the respondent submitted that certain portions of the affidavit of July 7, 1995 sworn by the applicant should be struck out or ignored in these proceedings, as should portions of the applicant's further memorandum of argument dated and filed August 8, 1995. In both documents the portions in question related to events which occurred following the decision here sought to be reviewed. Counsel for the applicant acknowledged that this was so but urged that those portions not be struck since they referred to the same issues that gave rise to the decision, and they made clear the continuing efforts on behalf of the applicant to apply for or have access to a process for a determination concerning his rehabilitation following service of the sentence for the offence of which he had been convicted in the United Kingdom.
[12]
It is trite law that in a judicial review proceeding the court proceeds on the basis of reviewing the decision in question in light of the evidence that was before the decision maker. Thus events following the decision are not relevant for purposes of this review FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED[13]
For the applicant it is urged that in the circumstances of this case the adjudicator had no jurisdiction to determine, as he did, that the applicant was inadmissible under s. 19(2)(a.1)(i) because, while the Minister was aware from 1989 of the applicant's earlier conviction, the applicant was never advised of the necessity to seek approval by the Minister of his rehabilitation, even in connection with his application for permanent residence status. In the circumstances it is suggested that out of fairness the onus shifts to the Minister to demonstrate that the applicant had not satisfied the Minister that he had rehabilitated himself, rather than the onus remaining with the applicant to demonstrate that he had satisfied the Minister. Put another way, the adjudicator is said to have had jurisdiction to make the order he did only when he was satisfied that five years had elapsed since the sentence had been served, a factor here admitted, and that the Minister had determined he was not rehabilitated. No evidence of the latter was here available to the adjudicator and thus, it is urged, the adjudicator exceeded his jurisdiction when he determined that the applicant was inadmissible.
[14]
I am not persuaded that the adjudicator erred in this way, or that he exceeded his jurisdiction. Pursuant to s. 8(1) of the
Act
the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate that he or she meets requirements for admission to Canada. Section 19(2)(a.1)(i), in my view, cannot be read as the applicant here urges. That provision is that a person is inadmissible where there are reasonable grounds to believe that he or she has committed abroad a certain type of criminal offence, unless that person has satisfied the Minister that he or she has rehabilitated himself or herself and that at least five years have elapsed since the expiration of any sentence imposed for the offence.
[15]
In this case, on his return to Canada and arrival at Pearson Airport on September 28, 1994, the applicant, seeking entry as a permanent resident, not as a visitor, required a visa obtained before his arrival, in accord with s. 9(1) of the
Act
. Having committed an offence in the United Kingdom, subsequently found to be an offence described under s. 19(2)(a.1)(i) he was inadmissible to Canada unless he demonstrated that he had satisfied the Minister that he had rehabilitated himself and that five years had elapsed since the expiration of his sentence for the offence committed in the U.K. In my opinion, under s. 8(1) the onus rests on the applicant at all times to establish that he has a right to be admitted to Canada, even, as in this case, where he has done all that could be expected of him to obtain the necessary approval of his rehabilitation, without any success because of apparent delays on the part of the respondent's department and its processes.
[16]
The decision of the senior immigration officer at the airport in completing a report under s. 20 of the
Act
is not questioned by this application for judicial review. That report indicated the officer's belief that the applicant had sought admission as an immigrant to Canada without a visa or a permit and was thus inadmissible pursuant to s. 19(2)(d) of the
Act
, and further, that he was inadmissible under s. 19(2)(a.1)(i). Where such a report is completed the
Act
directs that there be an inquiry. That inquiry required under s. 27 led to the decision of the adjudicator that is here questioned by judicial review.
[17]
The facts on which the senior immigration officer's report was based were not seriously questioned at the hearing before the adjudicator though there was serious debate about the latter's jurisdiction and the appropriate outcome in light of those facts. The adjudicator did have the responsibility to determine whether the offence for which the applicant had been convicted abroad clearly fell within the paragraph in question and he here did so. He concluded that the offence involving possession of stolen property was one punishable by way of indictment under the
Criminal Code
by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than ten years and thus it was within s. 19(2)(a.1)(i). Where that is the case, under s. 32(5)(a) of the
Act
the adjudicator has no discretion but is required to issue a deportation order. He was similarly required, pursuant to s. 32(5)(b) to issue an exclusion order to the applicant, since he arrived in Canada without having obtained a visa. On the facts of this case, which are not disputed, it is my opinion that the adjudicator acted within his jurisdiction under the
Act
in making the decision here in question.
[18]
It is also argued on behalf of the applicant that the decision here ought to be set aside since the process followed did not meet requirements of procedural fairness. The argument of the applicant was that a statute imposing an obligation on a person to satisfy the Minister of his rehabilitation implicitly imposes an obligation on the respondent Minister to consider the applicant's circumstances, particularly when the matter is raised for consideration by the applicant. Here the applicant knew nothing of the requirement until after September 1994 and efforts thereafter before the adjudication hearing to have access to a process for a determination, positive or negative, by the Minister simply led nowhere. The applicant was advised that the initiative would be taken by the Minister but it was not. At one stage he was advised that he might make application at local offices but they would not or could not accept his application.
[19]
It is urged that the adjudicator erred by assuming the lack of evidence of the Minister's approval of his rehabilitation was equivalent to a negative decision by the Minister. Thus reference by the case presenting officer and the adjudicator to the senior immigration officer's report as the basis for the adjudicator's jurisdiction, it is said, implicitly assumed that the Minister had accepted a report and determined that the applicant was not rehabilitated. I am not persuaded by this argument. It seems to me that the transcript of the hearing, and the adjudicator's insistence then that he could not make a decision for the Minister, can only be interpreted as the adjudicator's acceptance of the circumstance that there was no evidence before him that the Minister had in fact positively approved, that is, that the Minister had been satisfied, that the applicant had rehabilitated himself. In my opinion, the adjudicator did not deny procedural fairness in the conduct of the inquiry as here suggested on behalf of the applicant.
[20]
In
Minister of Employment and Immigration v. Gill (H.K.)
(1991), 137 N.R. 373 (F.C.A.), Heald, J.A., for the Court of Appeal said in part, at p. 376:
"... This court has held that it is not a precondition to the operation of s. 19(1)(c) [now subs. 19(2)(a.1)(i)] that the Governor-in-Council shall have considered the question of rehabilitation and be not satisfied that the applicant has brought himself within that exception."
[21]
In
Mohammed (M.M.I.) v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1988] 2 F.C. 363; 91 N.R. 121; 55 D.L.R.(4th) 321 (F.C.A.) (leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused (1989), 101 N.R. 157 (S.C.C.)) the court held that s. 19(1)(c) [now 19(2)(a.1)(i)] only requires the visa officer to be satisfied that no decision of satisfaction by the Governor-in-Council has been made. In my opinion, that is precisely what the immigration officer here concluded. In so doing he did not conclude there had been a negative decision. In recognizing no decision had been made he did not breach any duty of fairness owed to the applicant.
[22]
For the reasons set out, an order goes dismissing the application for judicial review.
[23]
Having so ordered, I note that at the time of hearing I directed counsel for the respondent to advise senior officers of the respondent's department that this court would urge that it complete processing of the applicant's application for permanent residence, filed and outstanding since 1989, and that it facilitate early determination of the question of the applicant's rehabilitation more than five years after conclusion of the sentence imposed in relation to the offence for which he was convicted in the United Kingdom, before steps are taken to execute the deportation order issued to the applicant. No good reason for administrative delay evident in this case was here suggested. Because this case appears to have arisen essentially on technical procedural requirements without consideration of the merits of the applicant's circumstances and his efforts to qualify for permanent resident status, the order issued in this matter includes in its preamble reference to my direction to counsel for the respondent.
[24]
Following the hearing in this case counsel requested opportunity to submit for consideration of the court a serious question of general importance pursuant to s. 83(1) of the
Act
. I agreed to reserving the decision pending receipt of any written submissions from counsel for the parties, to be submitted within a week of the hearing. No written submissions were received and no question is certified for consideration, pursuant to s. 83(1), by the Court of Appeal.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
[End of document]
