[14]
It is clearly established that the Minister's decision under s. 220.(3.1) of the
Income Tax Act
is discretionary and as such gives rise to a narrow scope of review. The standard of review for the Minister's decision pursuant to s. 220.(3.1) of the
Act
is discussed in
Kaiser v. Minister of National Revenue
(1995), 93 F.T.R. 66; 95 D.T.C. 5187 (T.D.), where Justice Rouleau states at p. 68:
"The purpose of this legislative provision is to allow Revenue Canada, Taxation, to administer the tax system more fairly, by allowing for the application of common sense in dealing with taxpayers who, because of personal misfortune or circumstances beyond their control, are unable to meet deadlines or comply with rules under the tax system. The language used in the section bestows a wide discretion on the Minister to waive or cancel interest at any time. To assist in the exercise of that discretion, policy guidelines have been formulated and are set out in Information Circular 92-2.
"The jurisprudence has established the standard to be employed by the courts when called upon to review the exercise of a discretionary power such as the one in question here. In
Re Maple Lodge Farms Ltd. and Government of Canada et al.
(1982), 137 D.L.R.(3d) 558 (S.C.C.), McIntyre, J., stated at p. 562:
'In construing statutes such as those under consideration in this appeal, which provide for far-reaching and frequently complicated administrative schemes, the judicial approach should be to endeavour within the scope of the legislation to give effect to its provisions so that the administrative agencies created may function effectively, as the legislation intended. In my view, in dealing with legislation of this nature, the courts should, wherever possible, avoid a narrow, technical construction, and endeavour to make effective the legislative intent as applied to the administrative scheme involved. It is, as well, a clearly-established rule that courts should not interfere with the exercise of a discretion by a statutory authority merely because the court might have exercised the discretion in a different manner had it been charged with that responsibility. Where the statutory discretion has been exercised in good faith and, where required, in accordance with the principles of natural justice, and where reliance has not been placed upon considerations irrelevant or extraneous to the statutory purpose, the courts should not interfere.'"