[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicant seeks an order in the nature of certiorari, in order to quash his conviction on February 6, 1991, by the respondent of having committed a disciplinary offence contrary to s. 39(g) of the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
which runs:
"39. Every inmate is guilty of a disciplinary offence who
(g) behaves toward any other person, by his actions, language or writing, in an indecent, disrespectful, threatening or defamatory manner,"
"Language or writing" set off by commas, refers to oral or written, intelligible expression of thoughts, ideas, or slogans of content or not. By way of example one might note that an obscure ancient Mayan curse intelligible to no one but scholars of the arcane and to him who expresses it, is not included in the legislated words: "by ... language or writing". No one can lawfully be punished for what he or she is thinking, and if the expression be unintelligible to everyone except him who expresses it, no offence is committed. Another observation is important at this point. It seems that it was the respondent himself (transcript: p. 20) who identified the gravamen of the catch-all offence charged as behaving in a "disrespectful ... manner", and not in a "defamatory manner".
[2]
The charge against the applicant was laid by Officer Heck, initials T.J. as it seems on Exhibit "B" to the applicant's affidavit, which is a photocopy of a filled-in form of "inmate offence report and notification of charge", on which it is noted that the offence allegedly occurred on January 11, 1991 at 14:00 o'clock. The description of the alleged offence is handwritten, thus:
"Inmate Buyens did state that I set him up on the drugs and money charges. That is an outright lie."
The alleged "witnessing officer" is, of course, the same Officer Heck, whose above-noted peroration is, perhaps justifiably, a touch emotional. In any event, Mr. Heck was not the "witnessing officer" at all. He was not present on the occasion of the alleged offence. He who signed the document as the "other witnessing officer", R.L. Higgins was present, but it was not he who levied the accusation. Mr. Higgins did, however, pass on the allegations to Mr. Heck.
[3]
This charge really should never have been levied against the applicant any more than if he had made a comment about the late Ayatollah Khomeini or some living but distant movie star, politician or judge. The evidence discloses that the charge is trivial and insubstantial and that the applicant's comment probably should have been allowed to pass without dignifying it with anyone's attention. That is not to say that if the Commissioner of Penitentiaries really wishes to clamp down on inmates' laconic expressions of never blaming themselves for the woe they bring upon themselves, the appropriate regulation could not be formulated. It is quite within the skill of drafters of legislation.
[4]
It may be that such tight control, scrupulously exercised is essential in the penitentiary setting. However when the offence charged here is invoked on such seemingly trivial and insubstantial facts, and sought to be stretched over circumstances beyond its apparent contemplation, one forces the court to come to a conclusion which seems to dilute the moral disciplinary authority of the regulation. Such a message ought not to be taken from these reasons. The authority of regulation 39(g) remains strong, valid and just for what it denounces, but naturally not for what it does not purport to denounce.
[5]
First, one should have regard for the applicant's version of events stated in his affidavit. Here are the pertinent passages:
"2. That on January 11, 1991, I was informed that the National Parole Board had granted me a day parole to commence on January 24, 1991.
"3. That on January 11, 1991, 45 minutes after being informed that the National Parole Board had granted me a day parole, my cell at William Head Institution was searched by two employees of Corrections Canada and contraband was found in my cell.
"4. That at the completion of the search referred to above, I stated to the guards who were carrying out the search 'I guess I have Officer Heck to thank for this because he was out to get me'.
"5. That the Officer Heck referred to in Statement Four is an employee of Corrections Service Canada and had on two previous occasions informed me that he was 'going to get me'.
"6. That in light of the statement referred to in Statement Five, I had an honestly held belief that Officer Heck was responsible for 'setting me up' in that I thought he had ordered the search of my cell.
"7. That I did not say the words 'I guess I have Officer Heck to thank for this' in Officer Heck's presence.
. . . . .
"10. That I have not appealed [sic] the conviction referred to in Statement Nine until now because I feared repercussions from Corrections' personnel."
It should be noted that these proceedings do not constitute an
appeal
from the decision for being allegedly against law, evidence and the
weight
of evidence. This, rather, is a judicial review of the respondent's performance on the basis of: fair procedures; correct application, on the record or by implication, of the law; and whether he took cognizance of the facts and applied them without an egregious error of omission or fabrication.
[6]
The relationship between Officer Heck and the applicant was not a happy one, at least from the applicant's point of view, and from the evidence not from Mr. Heck's point of view either. It goes beyond the emotional peroration in the charge sheet, no doubt inflamed by imprecise hearsay carried to Mr. Heck. The previous November, in 1990, according to the Officer Heck's own testimony (transcript: p. 24, applicant's ex. "A") the same officer had charged the applicant with an offence of which the applicant was found "not guilty". The transcript (pp. 24 to 26; B. is Mr. Barrett, the applicant's counsel, and H. is Officer Heck) continues:
"B.	Now do you remember, this was the day after the hearing, Officer Heck, saying to the client in the dorm, one day after that hearing, 'I'll get you for this Buyens, it doesn't matter what it takes'?
H.	No, that's incorrect. Buyens came into the dorm,
I motioned him over to the bubble
and at that point I said to him specifically, 'If you enter this building I will indeed be watching you.' Under the directives of our, that we operate under, if we have reasonable and probably [sic] grounds to suspect a person is involved in this ah, trade, we are obligated to watch a person.
B.	Alright, I agree I think that is very conscientious of you, but my question is do you remember saying to Mr. Buyens that 'I will get you for this is [sic] doesn't matter what it takes'?
H.	No, I did not make that statement.
B.	That was in November.
H.	I made the statement to him that I will indeed watch you. There is a big difference.
B.	I agree Officer. Now do you remember in December, Officer, having a telephone conversation int he dorm when you were in the bubble area with another guard and you were on the telephone and you said to that other, whoever you were speaking to, another guard I believe, and you were speaking on the phone and you said, 'Buyens beat me on this wrap [sic]. He made a fool out of me and nobody makes a fool out of me. I'll get him for this'?
H.	No, I did not make that statement.
B.	You don't remember making that statement?
H.	Nobody makes a fool out of me in that particular case.
B.	Right sir. In that case Mr. Buyens was found not guilty.
H.	I was hardly made a fool of.
B.	Okay. So you don't remember making that statement?
H.	I did not make the statement.
B.	Okay, Officer Heck, the last question that I have here for you, the day after Mr. Buyens was charged with this recent offence and he was inside here in the SCU unit and he was sitting in the television area. Do you remember walking past the glass panel, basically the vision area to the t.v. room, and you knocked on the window, do you remember doing this, knocking on the window ...
H.	Yes, I certainly do.
B.	... and saying to Mr. Buyens through the glass, 'I told you I'd get you. Now I am going to take you to outside court.'
H.	Wrong words. I said to him, 'You have now made a mistake, I am taking you to court.'
B.	That's what you said.
H.	That's exactly what I said. I did not say I am now getting you. I said to him, I paraphrased it, 'You have now made a mistake.'
B.	Okay. Those are all my questions."
[7]
Those were indeed all of counsel's questions, but Mr. Heck wanted to testify further about, and apparently even against, the applicant (still on p. 26 of the transcript where R. is the respondent):
"H.	Can I testify to the other part that I was going to?
R.	What other part?
H.	The subsequent follow up to the allegations that were made.
R.	I don't think it has got anything to do with the charge.
B.	Yeah, I don't, I'm not aware of any other charges as a follow-up.
H.	Well, there was two investigations done on the allegations.
R.	Well, I don't see that it has got to do with the charge. Now, you're dismissed."
[8]
Whatever was reported to Mr. Heck by hearsay to induce him to lay the charge against the applicant for uttering words which Mr. Heck himself never heard, for the impugned words were not uttered in his presence, it is clear that the applicant said much less than Mr. Heck believed or purported to believe that the applicant said. After cross-examining at some length the officer, Mr. Higgins identified as H. who was actually within earshot in the applicant's presence, counsel finally elicited this specific testimony:
"B.	Okay well what was said, we'll just go over this one more time, Mr. Buyens said, 'Oh yes, Officer Heck set me up I guess.' That's the words that you told us that Mr. Buyens said.
H.	And he also said that he had witnesses to prove that, that I guess past conversations that went down.
B.	To prove that Officer Heck would have set him up.
H.	(inaudible) ... I have no knowledge of, but what Buyens said to me that day I have first hand.
B.	There was no specific mention of planting drugs or planting money just the expression 'set me up'?
H.	Yup.
B.	Okay, that's all I wanted to ask about that."
Now, that is a very different statement from the accusation of planting evidence, which Officer Heck wrote on the charge sheet. It surely - and most likely - could indicate the applicant's despair at being, as he thought, specifically targeted for search by Officer Heck who was "watching" the applicant for any "mistake" he might make. The applicant was indeed found to have possession of contraband. Far from evincing disrespect the words which Officer Higgins proved were said by the applicant seem to evince a grudging respect for Officer Heck's vigilant and efficient performance of his duty to the great woe of him who was caught red-handed. That, at least, is the court's view. Thus, it appears that the respondent erred in law by not according the applicant the benefit of the manifest doubt.
[9]
The respondent made another error in law. The applicant could hardly have behaved "
toward
" Officer Heck, "by language ... in a disrespectful manner" if Officer Heck was not in the applicant's presence, which is qualitatively just as removed as being not on the premises, or absent on vacation, or otherwise unavailable to be "behaved toward" at all, grammatically awkward as the expression is. This highlights the distinction between forms of language. Oral expression simply evaporates into the atmosphere as soon as it is uttered, whilst written expression endures to be read by anyone literate in the language in which it is written. Here it is apparent that Officer Heck was not confronted with any writing on the wall, or any handbill, in which he was the subject of any comments whatever.
[10]
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[11]
The interpretation adopted by Rouleau, J., is hereby ratified and accepted. The applicant committed no offence of disrespect
toward
Officer Heck when one accords the applicant the benefit of any doubt or the presumption of being not guilty; and especially the applicant committed no offence of disrespect
toward
Officer Heck who was not even present. The respondent made the mistake of according to all corrections officers such a presumption of nobility, eternal even temper, wisdom and incorruptibility that no inmate could ever levy a sincere (even if erroneous) complaint against an officer without running afoul of s. 39(g). As noted, if the authorities seek to clamp down on inmates' expressions of woe, despair or complaint, they could seek a specific formulation of the regulation, by amendment, to achieve that goal, if it would pass the test of constitutionality, as it might if skillfully drafted. In these circumstances it was an error of law to convict the applicant of the offence.
[12]
One should not leave this subject without one final observation. The danger to such rights as inmates legitimately enjoy is vividly illustrated here. Mr. Heck was truly not the "witnessing officer". The witnessing officer was Mr. Higgins. As is so often demonstrable, by the time the hearsay got to Mr. Heck's ears, it was blown out of proportion and Mr. Heck not unnaturally felt aggrieved by what he heard - not personally from the applicant's lips, but secondhand from Mr. Higgins and another officer. Mr. Heck's writing of the charge was not performed dispassionately but emotionally, as has already been noted. This illustrates the danger of hearsay. Why did Mr. Higgins not lay the charge? Because the applicant's comment was not directed
toward
Mr. Higgins, no doubt. This illustrates the wisdom and practical justice which reside in Mr. Justice Rouleau's decision in
Bernier
.
[13]
The applicant's motion for certiorari will be allowed, and the respondent's decision to convict the applicant of an offence under s. 39(g) will be quashed for substantial error of law.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/sms
[End of document]
