[50]
As for the balance of the volume containing financial information, it consists of information essentially of three sorts: first, a verbal description of the financial plan contemplated for the project if the applicant's proposal, either for a bridge or for a tunnel, were accepted; second, letters of intent and commitment from financial partners in the venture and from an insurance broker; and third, the financial reports, of the applicant, submitted separately in a sealed envelope, and of its two financial partners, in both cases public and published annual reports of operations. In the covering letter of June 13, 1988, under which the original proposal was submitted, the following statement appears:
"In view of the confidential nature of part of the Financial documentation, we have chosen to place that complete section into a separate Volume 5. Thus Volume 5 applies to both Bridge and Tunnel Options."
In the Index to the Proposal as a whole I note that only volume 5 containing the Financial Plan, is described as "(Confidential)". While the restrictive statement included in each volume of its proposal does purport to restrict disclosure and use of the information contained in each volume, volume 5 concerning the financial plan does seem to have been specially treated by the applicant, specifically as confidential. I am prepared to find that, aside from the published financial and annual reports of associated public companies, it does qualify as confidential financial information within paragraph 20(1)(b). That volume is Exhibit "E" to the confidential affidavit of Mr. MacCoul filed in Court File T-1133-92. The same finding in my opinion, should apply to Exhibit "N" to that affidavit which is a volume, a Resubmission, in relation to the Financial Plan. Both Exhibits "E" and "N", aside from published financial reports of associated companies, contain information concerning financial commitments of other companies, not merely of the applicant, and they include information relating directly or indirectly to the confidential financial status of the applicant. In my opinion, that information is exempt from disclosure and ought to have been exempted by the respondent.