[5]
The PRRA officer found that the applicants' personal circumstances did not establish that the hardship of being refused the H&C exemption would cause them unusual and undeserved or disproportionate hardship. The PRRA officer found:
a. The risks alleged by the applicant were not personalized and state protection was available. The applicants stated that they feared crime, violence and racial tension and feared that they would be targeted as returnees. The PRRA officer stated that "everyone in Guyana is subject to these conditions" and the risk to the applicants did not meet the level of hardship warranting an H&C exemption (p. 2b);
b. The applicants were not established in Canada "beyond the normal establishment that one would expect the applicants to have achieved in the circumstances" (p. 2b). The PRRA officer acknowledged that the adult applicants were employed; that the applicants attended a Hindu temple and volunteered for certain organizations; and had provided reference letters from friends; but found that these facts did not go beyond the ordinary level of establishment. The PRRA officer also acknowledged that the applicants had purchased a home in Canada but stated that the house was purchased when the applicants' immigration status was not legal or was undecided and they were aware that they could be removed from Canada;
c. The PRRA officer acknowledged that, in addition to the adult applicants' daughter having established permanent residence in Canada, the applicants had extended family in Canada including the female applicant's mother and sister, both Canadian citizens; the adult male applicant's sister, a Canadian citizen; and a number of aunts, uncles, nephews, nieces and cousins. However, the PRRA officer found that there were no obstacles to the applicants applying as immigrants under the family class program and that family reunification, while a goal of the immigration system, was not the purpose of an H&C exemption. The PRRA officer also noted that the male applicant's extended family resides in Guyana and could provide support to the applicants (p. 2c);
d. The applicants' prolonged stay in Canada was not due to circumstances beyond their control. The conditional departure order was issued when the applicants' refugee claim was rejected on March 23, 2003 and the applicants have remained in Canada for another six years of their own will (p. 2c); and
e. The best interests of the minor child did not require that he remain in Canada. The child, Davendra, was 9 years old when the applicants came to Canada and is now 15 years old. The PRRA officer found that as Davendra had lived in Guyana for a major part of his young life, attended school there, speakes the language and is familiar with the customs, he would not have significant difficulty re-adapting to life there, particularly given his ability to adapt to life in Canada. The PRRA officer stated that the minor applicant would have his parents to assist him in this transition (p. 2c).