[31]
A significant decision in respect of the Gender Guidelines and domestic violence is that of
Griffith v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [1999] F.C.J. No. 1142; 171 F.T.R. 240 (T.D.), which was decided in July 1999. Justice Douglas Campbell stated the following about the lack of attention to the Gender Guidelines in the
Griffith
decision, at paragraphs 2 and 18-20:
"In addition to dealing with this obvious reviewable error requiring a redetermination of Ms. Griffith's application, to ensure a full and fair rehearing of her application, and, indeed, that of other women in her situation, I find it necessary to make an observation about the failure of the CRDD to adequately take into consideration the Immigration and Refugee Board's own Guidelines on Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution (the 'Gender Guidelines').
. . . . .
"C. The knowledge, understanding, and sensitivity required to assess credibility in the present case
"As stated, knowing how to decide whether to believe a refugee claimant who has suffered domestic violence is critical. Under the heading 'D. Special Problems at Determination Hearings', the Gender Guidelines clearly point out that:
'Women refugee claimants who have suffered sexual violence may exhibit a pattern of symptoms referred to as Rape Trauma Syndrome, and may require extremely sensitive handling. Similarly, women who have been subjected to domestic violence may exhibit a pattern of symptoms referred to as Battered Woman Syndrome and may also be reluctant to testify.'
"The 'pattern of symptoms' to be expected of women who have been battered is described in the footnote to the quote just cited as follows:
'For a discussion of the battered woman syndrome see
R. v. Lavallee
, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 852. [S.C.C.] In
Lavallee
, Madame Justice Wilson addressed the mythology about domestic violence and phrased the myth as "[e]ither she was not as badly beaten as she claims, or she would have left the man long ago. Or, if she was battered that severely, she must have stayed out of some masochistic enjoyment of it". The Court further indicated that a manifestation of the victimization of battered women is a "reluctance to disclose to others the fact or the extent of the beatings". In
Lavallee
, the Court indicated that expert evidence can assist in dispelling these myths and be used to explain why a woman would remain in a battering relationship.'
"Therefore, the Gender Guidelines suggest that to assess the actions of a woman subjected to domestic violence, special knowledge is an essential tool to use in reaching a fair and correct judgment."
State Protection