[65]
Finally, the case of
Weare v. Canada (Attorney General)
, [1998] F.C.J. No. 1145; 153 F.T.R. 75 (T.D.), shares a number of similarities with the instant case, including a long passage of time between the injury and the pension application. In that case, the Board found that the medical evidence was insufficient to support the conclusion that the condition pertaining to the lumbar spine was attributable to the Regular Force service or that there was any linkage between the spinal condition and the already pensioned condition of bilateral pes planus. The applicant was discharged in 1959 and applied for a disability pension in 1994. Justice MacKay stated as follows:
"19. Yet, the Board may reject the applicant's medical evidence when it has before it contradictory medical evidence, as noted by Mr. Justice Cullen in
Re Hornby
. Further, ss. 3 and 39 of the [
VAB
]
Act
do not mean that whatever submission is made by a veteran, that submission must automatically be accepted by the members of the Board. The evidence must be credible and must be reasonable. Finally, there is an obligation on the veteran to present evidence suggesting a causal link between service in the Forces and the ailment of which he or she complains. In the words of Madame Justice Reed in
Hall v. Canada (Attorney General)
:
'While the applicant correctly asserts that uncontradicted evidence by him should be accepted unless a lack of credibility finding is made, and that every reasonable inference should be drawn, and any reasonable doubt resolved in his favour, he still has the obligation to demonstrate that the medical difficulty from which he now suffers arose out of or in connection with his military service; that is, the causal linkage must be established.'
"20. In the case at bar, having examined the record that was before the Board, while there is little doubt the applicant suffers from knee and hearing ailments, I can find little if any evidence offered by the applicant demonstrating a causal link between his military service and these ailments. On the other hand, the report prepared by the Medical Advisory Directorate indicates that the hearing loss is not attributable to military service and that there is no evidence supporting a conclusion that the knee problems originated from service in the armed forces.
"21. On this basis, it is my view that it cannot be said that the Board came to a patently unreasonable finding or that it failed to weigh medical evidence in a proper fashion in relation to the claims by Mr. Weare in regard to his knees and his hearing. In the absence of any evidence of causality presented by the applicant, it is not open to the Board to conclude that such causality exists where medical reports it has requested suggest otherwise. In these circumstances, the Board cannot simply infer that ailments developing many years after Mr. Weare's discharge from the services were caused by his fall while in training in 1958."