[12]
The relevant provisions of the
Law respecting Conditions of Entry, Residence and Exit of Foreigners in Cameroon
(the relevant Cameroon legislation) are the following:
[TRANSLATION] "SECTION 8.-
"Foreigners are considered as residents when they have been in that capacity after a regular stay in the national territory for at least six consecutive years.
"SECTION 12.-
"Any foreigner already holding a valid residency card, as provided in section 17 below, is required on entry to the national territory to present his residency card and passport or any other travel document that is valid, accompanied by an exit visa as provided in section 29 below.
"SECTION 17.-
"(1) Any foreigner over 18 years of age who has entered the national territory regularly and is authorized to stay therein shall within three months, subject to being returned to the border, appear before the competent authorities to apply for a residency card.
. . . . .
"SECTION 18.-
"(1) The residency card is issued to foreigners admitted to the national territory for a stay of at least two years and not exceeding six years.
"(2) The residency card is valid for two years and is renewable.
. . . . .
"SECTION 20.-
"(1) A foreigner may obtain a resident alien card if he proves uninterrupted residence of at least six years in Cameroon and complies with the laws and regulations in effect.
. . . . .
"SECTION 23.-
. . . . .
"(2) Failure to renew the residency or resident alien card, either because the application was not made within the time stated in (1) above or because it was denied, will result in application of the removal to the border measure mentioned in heading VIII below.
"SECTION 25.-
"Any foreigner who resides outside the national territory for 12 consecutive months loses the benefit of the rights attaching to the validity of his residency card, or, as the case may be, his resident alien card, and his exit visa, except in the event of illness or act of God which has been duly established.
"SECTION 26.-
"Unless a foreigner's presence is a threat to society and public order, if he or she is under 18 years of age he or she is automatically entitled to a residency card or resident alien card, held by the individual's head of family or spouse, as the case may be.
. . . . .
"SECTION 29.-
"(1) Any foreigner who holds a residency or resident alien card is required to obtain an exit visa when he leaves the national territory, unless a particular agreement provides otherwise.
. . . . .
"SECTION 32.-
"(1) Expulsion is the administrative measure taken against any foreigner who appears at the entry to the national territory without completing the conditions of entry specified in this law. ..."