[16]
It was for the plaintiffs to show that this latter finding of fact was incorrect, and they did not succeed in doing this. As we know, in questions of credibility it is not this Court's function to take the place of the administrative tribunal when, as here, the plaintiff fails to show that its decision was based on an erroneous finding of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it (s. 18.1(4)(d) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7). It is well settled that the IRB is a specialized tribunal which has the power of assessing the plausibility and credibility of testimony so long as the inferences it draws are not unreasonable (
Aguebor v. Ministre de l'Emploi et de l'Immigration
(1993), 160 N.R. 315 (F.C.A.)) and the reasons are indicated in a clear and comprehensible way (
Hilo v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1991), 130 N.R. 236 (F.C.A.)). In the case at bar, after reviewing the evidence I am not persuaded that the IRB made any manifest and overriding error of fact. The IRB dismissed the plaintiff's testimony about her fear of returning to Cameroon because the plaintiffs waited three months after the attack before leaving. The IRB regarded as not credible the explanation given by the plaintiff that she did not wish to alarm her children again and so waited for the end of the school year before leaving. In view of the plaintiff's testimony that she continued working for those three months, and that the plaintiffs did not alter their way of life in any way, the IRB's finding that the plaintiff's conduct contradicted her alleged fear was not unreasonable. Apart from the attack described above, no other specific event was mentioned in which the plaintiffs were targets, either for the death squads or the Cameroon authorities. The legal arrest of the plaintiff's husband does not as such suffice to show that the plaintiffs were then in danger of persecution. Based on the facts in evidence the panel was justified in concluding that it was not reasonable for the plaintiffs not to have an exit visa as required by Cameroon law, and that they could not then rely on the lack of a right to return as a means of arguing that the exclusion clause should not be applied.