[20]
In exercising my discretion whether to award costs, I am guided the reasoning of Justice Frederick Gibson in CCH Cdn. Ltd. v. Law Society of Upper Canada (2000), 184 D.L.R. (4th) 186 at 190 in which he concluded that even unfocussed allegations that complicate the litigation may not warrant a cost award:
I am in agreement with the submissions of counsel for the defendant that the plaintiffs' allegations as set out in the statements of claim and the reliefs sought were extraordinarily broad and without specificity. As indicated in the reasons in these matters dated the 9th of November, 1999, it was only at the beginning of the trial that the plaintiffs focused their claims. It was also not until the beginning of trial that the plaintiffs dropped very significant claims for relief and focused their remaining substantive claim, that being for a permanent injunction, even though that claim continued to be stated in very broad terms. In summary, the plaintiffs presented an amorphous and moving target. While I am not satisfied that the conduct of the plaintiffs, at least once the trial commenced, "unnecessarily lengthened the duration of the proceedings", it certainly complicated the preparation for and presentation at trial for the defendant.
. . . . .
I find no basis on which to conclude that any step in these actions was improper, vexatious or unnecessary or taken through negligence, mistake or excessive caution. This finding is in spite of my earlier comments regarding commencement of three separate actions, failure on the part of the plaintiffs to specifically define their claims and the reliefs sought prior to the commencement of trial, extension by the defendant of its counterclaim to cover self-copying services, and failure by the defendant to effectively define its constitutional defences at an earlier stage of the proceedings. None of these factors, in my view, fits the description of an improper, vexatious or unnecessary step or amounted to a step taken through negligence, mistake or excessive caution.