[51]
Paragraphs 29 through 33 of Mr. Marengère's affidavit are headed
The Credit Agreement — Errors in the Dazé affidavit
. For sake of completeness, I quote these paragraphs in their entirety:
"29. The purposes of the Credit Agreement appear at paragraph 4.9 thereof. The Dazé affidavit, at paragraph 10, incorrectly states that the Credit Agreement was signed 'afin de rendre disponible à l'emprunteur une somme totalisant 14 800 000 $ U.S. pour financer le paiement des sommes dues à Wellgate International en vertu d'une entente de règlement, de quittance et de libération (Settlement Agreement)'.
"30. Another error occurs in paragraph 11 of the Dazé affidavit, where she assumes that the only company providing services under the Services Agreement is the Petitioner. Mr. Roberge appears to make the same mistaken assumption. The Settlement Agreement clearly refers to other corporations, namely, Fidutech International, Inc. and Fidutech Technologies, Inc., and in any event, the Services Agreement does not limit the number of companies which may provide the services which are promised.
"31. Paragraph 12 of the Dazé affidavit is also incorrect. By its terms, paragraph 3 of the Settlement Agreement calls for the delivery of a note and not for payment of a sum of money to the firm Pouliot, Mercure. The note is to be in the face amount of $4.8 million U.S. maturing October, 1999, (the whole as more fully appears from exhibit 'E' to the Dazé affidavit which appears to have escaped the attention of Mr. Roberge), in which I and the petitioner share a beneficial interest to the extent of $2.7 million U.S.
"32. As a result of the Credit Agreement and the delivery of the note, Wellgate International Ltd. became a secured creditor of Dominion Bridge Corp. and its subsidiaries, including Cedar Group Canada Inc.
"33. As a result of the April 28, 1998 comprehensive transaction, I together with a number of other senior executives had resigned all positions in the Dominion Group. We had no subsequent involvement in the operations of the Dominion Group."