[10]
The crux of the adjudicator's February 14 decision can be found at pp. 7 and 8 and reads as follows:
"The Band submits that the sole reason for discontinuing Ms. Young's position was the necessity to redress the Band's finances. Leaving aside for the moment the requirements of s. 209.1, I have reviewed the evidence adduced by the Band with regard to the discontinuance of Ms. Young's position. It consisted in part of excerpts of its financial statements that show an accumulated deficit in the band's government activities account. This being said, no convincing evidence was adduced to establish the precise circumstances of the decision to abolish Ms. Young's position in relation to that deficit. The only evidence offered in this respect shows that the janitor's position was abolished and consolidated with that of manager. Even though the Band's initial reply to the complaint referred to Ms. Young's seniority, it did not adduce any evidence to show that seniority was ever considered.
"Further, no indication was given as to the impact of Ms. Young's position on the Band's government costs nor was any evidence adduced on the actual impact of such decision on the Band's financial situation. The Band's own evidence, as I understand it, was that Ms. Young's position was funded through a budget that was not transferable, a budget not even related to the Band's government account. How was it, in those circumstances, that abolishing her position would improve the Band's deficit with respect to its band government account?
"Finally and more importantly, in the months that followed her departure, the Band created and posted a position identical to that held by Ms. Young. It was suggested that since the new position was funded by the LAMBAT, it created a new situation. My finding is that it did not. This is evidenced by the fact that the LAMBAT itself cancelled its commitment of the so-called new position when it learned about Ms. Young's instant complaint. All these facts suggest that the so-called new position was simply intended to replace Ms. Young by someone else and that the alleged difficult financial situation of the Band was not the cause of the abolition of the position in the first place.
"Overall, the evidence adduced before me tends to show that Ms. Young's position was abolished for reasons unrelated to the Band's finances. It is likely that her relationship with a band councillor who was not in good terms with others on the Council played a role in the decision. Maybe did (sic) the fact that she is not a Band member also played in the decision. Finally, her absence on maternity leave opened the way to an unfair treatment contrary to the
Act
. This being so, I do not find that Ms. Young was laid off due to a lack of work following the discontinuance of her function."