[24]
The third argument in law raised in respect of s. 37(1)(a) is whether a slightly higher standard of proof of reasonableness should be applied where "an interest in liberty is at stake". Here the interest at stake is the individual's permanent residency status, if such status is lost, the individual is at risk of deportation. There is not a loss of life or liberty; even if at risk of deportation, risk assessments are made as to possible consequences should the person be sent outside Canada. The determination as to membership is made at a low threshold, "reasonable grounds", and has no bearing in respect of charges that may or may not be laid under criminal statutes. The case of
Dalton Cartage Co. v. Continental Insurance Co. and St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Co.
, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 164; 40 N.R. 135, cited by Applicant's Counsel for the proposition that a "balance of probabilities" test should apply, in fact stands for the proposition that the relevant standard applicable to the issue at hand applies, whether or not morally blameworthy or criminal or penal aspects allegations may have been made. In that case, a civil case, it was urged that the criminal standard of "proof beyond a reasonable doubt" should apply to such circumstances. The Court said no, Laskin, C.J., for the Court said:
"The main point in the appeal was the third point raised which was that the trial judge and the Court of Appeal had mis-stated the burden of proof and, indeed, were applying a sliding burden of proof rather than a straight burden of proof on a balance of probabilities. The issue was raised because of the way the trial judge dealt with the provisions respecting fraud and dishonesty in the St. Paul policy and infidelity in the Continental policy.
. . . . .
"Where there is an allegation of conduct that is morally blameworthy or that could have a criminal or penal aspect and the allegation is made in civil litigation, the relevant burden of proof remains proof on a balance of probabilities.
. . . . .
"The question in all civil cases is what evidence with what weight that is accorded to it will move the court to conclude that proof on a balance of probabilities has been established."