 [8] 
  In reaching this conclusion, the Senior Hearing Officer held, inter alia, the following: 
 
 
 
 "(i) With respect to the nature of the use by the respondent: 
 
 
 
 I agree that the evidence filed is not overwhelming and that it could have been more informative. However, given the fact that Mr. Rothenberg has stated that the wares are manufactured by the  
 registrant 
  [the respondent] and distributed by its licensee, I am prepared to accept that that is the normal course of trade for the wares and that the registrant has control over the quality and character of the wares distributed by National Tobacco, as it is the manufacturer. The words 'MADE IN USA FOR ... NATIONAL TOBACCO' appearing in Exhibit 'C' would appear to confirm that the wares are not manufactured by National Tobacco but by a U.S. entity which I assume would be the registrant. Consequently, in accordance with s. 50 of the  
 Trade-marks Act 
 , I accept that any use by National Tobacco is deemed to be use by the registrant. Furthermore, having regard to the evidence in its totality, and particularly paragraphs 3 and 5, I am willing to infer that the reference to WRANGLER in the invoice dated September 25, 1992 is a reference to the registrant's smokeless tobacco. 
 
 
 
 "(ii) With respect to the evidence of the single sale by National Tobacco: In my view, the sale evidenced appears to be a genuine sale in the registrant's normal course of trade. Consequently, I accept it as such. 
 
 
 
 "(iii) With respect to the use of labels of the type attached as Exhibit C to the Rothenberg affidavit: 
 
 
 
 Consequently, the logical assumption is that such labelling would have been applied to the wares as it is the registrant that manufactures the wares that are distributed and sold in Canada by National Tobacco under license as stated in paragraph 3 of the affidavit. 
 
 
 
 "(iv) Mr. Rothenberg was manifestly in a position to know of the matters to which he deposed in his affidavit." 
