[20]
In the early 1990's considerable efforts were made by the government, encouraged by lobbyists for many of the interested parties, to abolish the compulsory licence system for medicines, and to put in place a suitable system that would encourage development in the area while making medicines available to Canadians at affordable prices. The parties in this action, by agreement, filed six volumes of material said to comprise selected portions of transcripts of parliamentary committee debates, submissions by lobbyists and speeches in the House of Commons (Exhibit 2). I have not found this material to be helpful. In general, such material is not to be used in interpreting a statute or regulation (e.g.
Reference Re Validity of Regulations in Relation to Chemicals
, [1943] S.C.R. 1 per Duff, C.J., at page 12). However, to give a flavour of the debate in the House of Commons, I repeat part of what was said by Hon. Pierre Blais (Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs and Minister of State (Agriculture) - as he then was), on December 10, 1992 in introducing Bill C-91 which Bill included amendments the
Patent
Act
, including section 55.2 at issue here. He said inter alia:
"On several occasions since June, I have had an opportunity to explain the main objectives of Bill C-91 and I would like to come back to them a little.
"First, Bill C-91 is meant to continue the major undertaking of modernizing Canadian intellectual property legislation, which began some years ago. In the present economic context where knowledge and innovation are the watchwords, I think that everyone will agree that it is an essential element of our competitiveness.
"Our purpose is also to align our laws with those of most of our international competitors, so that Canada can provide the same benefits and be as attractive as other countries in terms of international trade and investment.
"This bill will help us to stimulate research and development in Canada, as well as growth in a leading-edge sector.
"With Bill C-91, we also wanted to strengthen consumer protection, so that consumers can continue to obtain patented medicine at reasonable prices. I think that all Canadians are entitled to that."