 [8] 
  Instead of redoing the analysis already undertaken by my colleague Martineau J., I will quote his comments in Zolotareva v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), 2003 FC 1274, [2003] F.C.J. No. 1596, at paragraphs 12-18: 
 
 
 
 (A) Did the PRRA Officer have the authority under the Act to represent the Minister for the purpose of conducting the application under subsection 25(1) of the Act? 
 
 
 
 The applicant submits that the PRRA Officer exceeded his jurisdiction by making a determination pursuant to subsection 25(1) of the Act which reads as follows: 
 
 
 
 25. (1) The Minister shall, upon request of a foreign national who is inadmissible or who does not meet the requirements of this Act, and may, on the Minister's own initiative, examine the circumstances concerning the foreign national and may grant the foreign national permanent resident status or an exemption from any applicable criteria or obligation of this Act if the Minister is of the opinion that it is justified by humanitarian and compassionate considerations relating to them, taking into account the best interests of a child directly affected, or by public policy considerations. 
 
 
 
 The applicant argues that this provision provides the "Minister" and the PRRA Officer to exercise its discretion. In support of this argument, the applicant submits that there is no indication that the Minister delegated any authority to the PRRA Officer. 
 
 
 
 According to subsection 6(1) of the Act, the Minister may designate any persons or class of persons as PRRA officers to carry out any purpose of any provision of the Act. A review of the instruments of designation/delegation under the Act shows that the PRRA Officers have been delegated the authority established under subsection 25(1) of the Act. 
 
 
 
 More particularly, Module 1 of the Designation Modules (Item 45) delegates the determination under subsection 25(1) of the Act: 
 
 
 
 Item 45. Delegated Authority - Determine, on request, whether the applicant meet the requirement of the Regulations to be a class member; examine the circumstances concerning a foreign national who is inadmissible on grounds other than security, violating human or international rights, serious criminality, organized crime or health grounds, or does not meet the requirements of the Act or the Regulations;  
 form an opinion to whether special considerations are justified by humanitarian and compassionate considerations relating to them or by public policy; and may grant an exemption from any applicable criteria or obligations of this Act 
 ; and impose the prescribed conditions, if any, on the foreign national. [Emphasis by Martineau J.] 
 
 
 
 More specifically, Item 45 of the Designation Modules provides the authority to be delegated to the PRRA Officer in the Quebec regions: 
 
 
 
 Item 45. Citizenship and Immigration Officer - Senior Immigration Examining Officer - Enforcement Officer - Immigration Advisor - Expertise Officer -  
 Pre-Removal Risk Assessment (PRRA) Officer 
 . [Emphasis by Martineau J.] 
 
 
 
 In light of the above, it is clear that the PRRA Officer has jurisdiction to make a determination under subsection 25(1) of the Act. 
 
