[39]
I think it helpful to reflect on the principles by which the concept of apprehended bias is determined. On this the
Sparvier
decision, above, again offers guidance at paragraphs 53 to 57:
"53 The question of bias strikes at the heart of the validity of the Appeal Tribunal's actions. The underlying doctrine with respect to bias is based on the oft-quoted maxim of Lord Chief Justice Hewart in
Rex v. Sussex Justices.Ex parte McCarthy
, [1924] 1 K.B. 256, at page 259:
'... justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.'
"54 The test for a reasonable apprehension of bias was stated by de Granpre, J. (sic), in the
Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al.
, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 369, at page 394:
'The proper test to be applied in a matter of this type was correctly expressed by the Court of Appeal. As already seen by the quotation above, the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and rightminded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information. In the words of the Court of Appeal, that test is "what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically -- and having thought the matter through -- conclude ..."'
"55 The application of the test for reasonable apprehension of bias will depend on the nature of the tribunal in question. In
Newfoundland Telephone Co. v. Newfoundland (Board of Commissioners of Public Utilities)
, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 623, Cory, J., states at pages 638-639:
'It can be seen that there is a great diversity of administrative boards. Those that are primarily adjudicative in their functions will be expected to comply with the standard applicable to courts. That is to say that the conduct of the members of the board should be such that there could be no reasonable apprehension of bias with regard to their decision. At the other end of the scale are boards with popularly elected members such as those dealing with planning and development whose members are municipal councillors. With those boards, the standard will be much more lenient. In order to disqualify the members a challenging party must establish that there has been a pre-judgment of the matter to such an extent that any representations to the contrary would be futile. Administrative boards that deal with matters of policy will be closely comparable to the boards composed of municipal councillors. For those boards, a strict application of a reasonable apprehension of bias as a test might undermine the very role which has been entrusted to them by the legislature.' [page 164]
"56 In my view, the function of the Appeal Tribunal is adjudicative. Its duty is to decide appeals based on contraventions of the
Cowessess Indian Reserve Elections Act
or illegal, corrupt or criminal practices on the part of candidates. Even though Appeal Tribunal members may not be legally trained, it appears that they are to decide, based on facts and their application of the
Act
or other Band customs, traditions or perhaps other laws, whether or not to uphold an election or order a new election. Members are not popularly elected. Although the
Act
uses the term 'elected', members are selected by the Band Council.
"57 This leads me to conclude that in the absence of compelling reasons, a more rigorous rather than a less strict application of the reasonable apprehension of bias test would be desirable in the case of the Appeal Tribunal. I will comment further on the question of compelling reasons to the contrary subsequently. I should add, however, that on the facts of this case, a less strict application of the test leads me to the same conclusion I would have reached had I applied the test in a more rigorous fashion."
I accept Justice Rothstein's conclusions about the need to rigorously apply the principles of apprehended bias to the work of a Band Election Tribunal. In all adjudicative processes by which democratic elections may be scrutinized or challenged, the need to ensure impartiality is critical to maintenance of electoral confidence.