[37]
After the hearing but before the Board issued its decision, Ms. Myle's counsel submitted to the Board a most recent decision on a similar case from St. Vincent which appears to direct the Board's attention to this issue of state protection and that of IFA. In
Franklyn
, above, Justice Yves de Montigny states the following, at paragraphs 25-27:
"In the circumstances of this case, I do not think that it was objectively reasonable to expect the applicant to have further sought the protection from the police after having been rebuffed or ignored previously. Considering the poor record of St-Vincent and the Grenadines with respect to the protection of assaulted women, it is not difficult to conceive of the enormous difficulties a woman with unorthodox sexual practices is likely to encounter in complaining about the physical abuses she has been subjected to. For these reasons, and applying the reasonableness simpliciter standard of review, I believe the Board was not sensitive enough to her predicaments and asked for too much in terms of a proof that the state was incapable to protect her: see, by analogy,
N.K. v. Canada (Solicitor General)
(1995), 107 F.T.R. 25 (F.C.); [1995] F.C.J. No. 889 (QL).
"With respect to an IFA, it is well established that 'the Board must be satisfied on a balance of probabilities that there is no serious possibility of the claimant being persecuted in the part of the country to which it finds an IFA exists' (
Rasaratnam v. Canada (M.E.I.)
, [1992] 1 F.C. 706, at p. 710; [1991] F.C.J. No. 1256 (QL). In the present case, the Board inferred from the fact that the Applicant searched for a new job in a new location (either in the Grenadines or in the neighbor countries of Saint Martin and Grenada), that she would have seen herself as able to live successfully apart from and un-harassed by her ex-boyfriend had she been able to find such a job.
"I think that the Board erred in making that assumption. Not only was this assumption disputed by the Applicant herself in her testimony before the Board (Transcripts, p. 38), but it defies logic to believe that an island separated only by a few kilometres of open water from Saint Vincent and easily accessible by ferry or plane could provide a safe heaven to the Applicant. The Board should have known that these islands are sparsely populated and geographically very small, and that it would be relatively easy to find somebody for whoever is bent on doing so. This information was readily accessible to the Board, as part of the Regional Country File that forms part of the record. The Applicant did not need to adduce evidence in this regard."