[9]
The medical evidence submitted to the Assessment Panel is a letter from Mr. King's family physician, Dr. Li, dated December 4, 1997. The Board had before it another letter from Dr. Li dated March 10, 1998 in which the latter made certain supplementary com­ments. Those letters are reproduced below:
"4 Dec 1997
Mr. Scott F. Fowler
Fowler & Fowler
P.O. Box 721, 885 Main Street, Suite 11
Moncton, N.B.
E1C 8M9
Dear Mr. Fowler:
Re: Mr. Robert King
44 Havenwood Court, Moncton, N.B.
Further to my report to the Dept. of Veter­ans Affairs dated on 22 May 1997, I found that Mr. King's conditions had remained unchanged in the last 6 months. He con­tinues to be greatly affected by his 3 major illnesses:
Ligamentous strain of the lumbar spine. This has been documented by numerous other physicians in the past. He continues to have intractable pain involving the lumbar area with radiation to the upper back, neck and to both legs. He stated that the pain is constant and would be exacer­bated by simple movements. The pain has curtailed his activities of daily living and is unable to participate in any physical and leisure pursuits. The pain affects his sleep and sexual enjoyment. He is currently on Indocid and Tylenol #3, and he uses a T.E.N.S. machine. He needs to wear a back brace during most of his waking hours. He needs help with dressing and bathing.
When examined on 25 Nov 1997, there were marked tenderness along the lumbar spine and musculatures, and forward flexion was limited to hands to mid thigh by back pain. Straight leg raising was normal. The reflexes were normal. He walked with the help of a walker and was able to walk the full length of the 20' corridor slowly by himself. He reported that he often need a wheelchair to go for longer outings, which is far in between. An important physical findings is that he has morbid obesity, weighing in at 254 lbs, which no doubt further aggravated his back pain. He had actually gained 30 lbs since 1992 as he claimed that he cannot exercise to lose weight;
Chronic anxiety with tension headaches. He has an anxiety neurosis that caused continuous moderate distress for him. He is particularly fixated at his pain syndrome and he seems to be obsessed with the pension appeal process, instead of focus­ing his energy toward developing better coping mechanism for his chronic pain condition. He claims that he is very edgy and could be quite temper mental at home, causing significant discord for his family. He and his wife had been separated at times due to his psychological maladap­tation. He also complains of insomnia and chronic head­aches. His concentration and memory is poor at times and he often has a depressed mood. He tends to overreact to different life stressors and had periods of severe psychological decompensation re­quiring hospitalization in the past. He had docu­mented suicidal attempts, the last one being in May 1990. Currently he did not voice any suicidal ideation.
For his anxiety and depression, he is on Paxil
20 mg a day, Mellaril 50 mg twice a day and (illegible) 0.5 mg 3 times a day. I am providing him psychological and spir­itual counselling, but he will require in-depth counselling to help him with his problems;
Coccyx fracture. He complains that he has difficulty sitting, and often requires a donut cushions. He is prone to constipation which would aggravate the coccygeal pain, hence he needs a regular stool softener.
In conclusion, I feel that Mr. King has a severe disability based on his ligamentous strain of the lumbar spine at 50%, chronic anxiety with tension headaches at 40%, and coccygeal pain at 10%. Please see the attached disability assessment table for further details.
Yours truly
John H.L. Li"
"10 March 1998
Mr. Scott Fowler
Fowler & Fowler
P.O. Box 721, 885 Main Street, Suite 11
Moncton, N.B.
E1C 8M9
Dear Mr. Fowler:
Re: Mr. Robert King
44 Havenwood Court, Moncton, N.B.
I'm writing to you to clarify my report on Mr. King dated on 4 Dec 1997.
Regarding his chronic back pain, I am aware that he also suffers from degener­ative arthritis of the lumbar spine and that he had past spinal fusion. I would like to draw your attention to a report by Dr. Andrew Clark dated on 1 September 1992 which was addressed to you. In paragraphs 5 of page 3 of this report, Dr. Clark stated that 'His subsequent problems leading to the spinal fusion would appear to be a direct consequence of the original injury. In turn, his present complaints and radio­logical evidence of degenerative disc disease at the L3-4 level above the spinal fusion are also a known long-term conse­quence from a spinal fusion'.
It is my opinion that Mr. King's chronic back pain condition is solely caused, di­rectly and indirectly by the initial accident dated in 1968 during which he received the ligamentous strain of the lumbar spine. Therefore, my report on 4 Dec 1997, I referred specifically to the ligamentous strain of the lumbar spine when I assessed his degree of disability related to the lum­bar spine.
Chronic anxiety with tension headache. In my report dated 4 Dec 1997, I would like to clarify that the clinical findings and disability assessment in the psycho neur­osis scale was solely based on the chronic anxiety with tension headache which led to a 30-40% disability.
Mr. King did suffer from periods of dis­ability of up to 100% on the psycho­neurosis scale, when he had exacerbation of depression and chronic pain syndrome. I included these information on my last report as I feel that the Veterans Review and Appeal Board should be cognizant of the fact that Mr. King is indeed suffering tremendously from his disability and which can at times render him totally disabled.
I would like to add that Mr. King has been placed on Ms Cantin 15 mg twice a day and MSIR 5 mg every 4 hrs when needed for his chronic back pain.
In my previous letter to you dated 5 June 1995, I erroneously dated the initial ac­cident in 1969 instead of the correct year of 1968.
I sincerely hope that the above clarifica­tions will help the Board to review Mr. King's appeal in a more favourable light. I remain,
Yours sincerely
John H.L. Li"