[7]
In
Legault v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [2001] F.C.J. No. 568; 203 F.T.R. 47 (T.D.), Nadon, J., set out the two approaches that have been taken by judges of this Court regarding the consideration of the best interests of the children required by
Baker
. At paragraph 55 Nadon, J., states:
"The first one, which I would characterize as the process approach, is the one taken in the
Young
,
Mayburov
and
Russell
decisions. The other approach, which I would characterize as the substantive approach, is the one taken in the other cases. Under the process approach, the Court will examine whether the immigration officer has taken into consideration the effects which the parents' departure from Canada might have upon the children. If the immigration officer has taken into consideration these effects, the Court will not intervene, even though the decision made is not a favourable one to the applicant. On the other hand, under the substantive approach, the Court will not only verify whether the officer has considered the effects of a refusal of the parents' application under section 114(2), but will go further and assess whether the ultimate decision is the correct one."
In my view, I do not have to choose between these approaches in this case, since under either approach the failure of the Officer to take into account the children's inability to speak the Tamil language is an error. It is certainly something that should have been taken into account in considering the best interests of the children. The Immigration Officer looked at the risks to the children and, since their risk was the same as the parents' risk, concluded that there would be no risk to the children. However, an analysis of the best interests of the children requires an officer to look at more than just the risk to the children. The only analysis of the best interests of the children, and a very limited one at that, is included in paragraph 10 of the Officer's affidavit referred to above. She states:
"... the children would have to make some real adjustments to living outside Canada but I did not see any evidence that they would not be able to manage the adjustment."