 [23] 
  The requirements of procedural fairness in the context of a passport revocation and permanent passport services suspension were considered in  
 Kamel v Attorney General of Canada 
 , 2008 FC 338, [2008] 1 FCR 59 [ 
 Kamel 
 ] (which was overturned by the Federal Court of Appeal in  
 Kamel v Canada (Attorney General) 
 , 2009 FCA 21, [2009] 4 FCR 449 but not on these points). The situation in Kamel was different from that in the present case in that here the passport services were suspended by Passport Canada for five years. In  
 Kamel 
 , on the other hand, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Trade suspended Mr. Kamel's passport services indefinitely, based on the determination that he posed a security risk. The Minister's decision turned on a report from the Canadian Security Intelligence Service that was not disclosed to Mr. Kamel. Justice Noël determined that, in not being informed of the substance of the report, Mr. Kamel had been denied procedural fairness which, in the circumstances of that case, required that Mr. Kamal be provided with the ability to engage in "full participation" in the process before the Minister. According to Justice Noël, to ensure this, he needed "... to know exactly what the allegations against him [were] ... and what the information collected in the course of the investigation [was to] ... be able to respond to it completely" ( 
 Kamel 
  at para 68). This, however, did not mean that Passport Canada was required to hold a hearing, and, indeed, Justice Noël noted that in most circumstances a hearing will not be required. Rather, according to Justice Noël, at para 72: 
 
 
 
 [...] It is sufficient if the investigation includes disclosure to the individual affected of the facts alleged against him and the information collected in the course of the investigation and gives the applicant an opportunity to respond to it fully and informs him of the investigator's objectives; as well, the decision-maker must have all of the facts in order to make an informed decision.