[12]
In guidance to those such as the visa officer in this matter who are required to use the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations ("CCDO") in assessing applications for landed immigrant status, the following is provided:
"(4)
The Lead Statement
(of an occupation description) is a concise description of the nature and purpose of the occupation. It describes the principal duties of the worker, and gives a general indication of how the occupation differs from other occupations.
"(5)
The Statement of Duties
is necessarily a broad description of the nature and scope of the work involved. This description will not always coincide exactly with the duties required in every job situation, but it does indicate, either directly or by inference, what the workers normally do, how, and why they do it."
The description "Production Co-ordinator (clerical); production expediter; production scheduler", reads as follows:
"Co-ordinates and expedites flow of work
within
or between departments of manufacturing plant according to production schedule:
Reviews production schedule and work orders and reschedules processes to eliminate duplicate machine setups. Distributes work orders to departments denoting number, type and proposed completion date of units to be produced. Confers with department supervisors to determine progress of work and completion and delivery dates. Suggests assembly and disassembly of stock parts or assemblies to provide spare parts during component shortages or production delays. Compiles reports on progress of work and machine, tool and equipment failures, using typewriter, to inform production planning department of production delays. Informs department supervisor of changes in processing methods received from engineering departments."
Having turned to the CCDO for guidance in this matter, the visa officer was obliged to take the whole of the occupation description into account and to interpret it appropriately. Here, the lead statement of the occupation description clearly indicates that a production co-ordinator may co-ordinate and expedite flow of work
within
a department of a manufacturing plant even though the statement of duties that follows seems to reflect an interdepartmental co-ordination which is only partially consistent with the lead statement. The visa officer rejected consideration of the applicant against the occupational description because the applicant had not been involved with co-ordinating work between "... different units but was rather supervising the work within a single production unit". In so concluding, I am satisfied that the visa officer misinterpreted the occupation description on the facts of the applicant's situation and in so doing erred in law.