[12]
A number of other judges of this court have adopted a different view. In his recent decision in
Harry, Re
, [see footnote 12] Justice Muldoon repeated his strongly held opinion concerning the proper interpretation of paragraph 5(1)(c):
"20. To give away citizenship to those who do not take the trouble to comply with the provisions solemnly enacted by Parliament is not only a kind of
lèse majesté
, but it just cheapens Canadian citizenship. Serious, sincere applicants simply must comply with the law, in common with everyone else, whether they like it or not. What a terrible message this court sends, by overruling a citizenship judge, and granting someone citizenship by defeating Parliament's will! The court does not make
itself
look good by that sort of false bounty. It does not foster respect for the law.
"21. It appears clearly that all of the fore­going is not merely judicial speculation or prattle. Parliament has been amending the
Citizenship Act
from time to time since the promulgation of the revised statutes. It has not taken any occasion to enact any provision whatever regarding the residence rules, to make any exception or provide for the granting of citizenship to any applicant who
- would likely be a good citizen, but fails to comply with paragraph 5(1)(c);
- has 'centralized' his or her 'lifestyle' in Canada because of any circumstance, but is absent;
- has sent or deposited his or her per­sonal property (i.e. bank account, clothing, automobile, etc.) to reside in Canada, while the applicant is absent from this country;
- has become 'Canadianized' in less time than the prescribed three of the im­mediately previous four years;
- needs to be out of Canada on business or whatever for longer than one year of the immediately previous four years;
- has a spouse and/or children or other family members who are already citizens.
"22. This trend of ignoring the law as Parliament wrote it seems to have started with
Papadogiorgakis
, [1978] 2 F.C. 208. Although that case was decided by an eminent judge of the day, the decision is not binding simply because there is no appeal from these citizenship appeal judg­ments. This factor can create, and does still create a scandalous incertitude in the law." [see footnote 13]