 [11] 
  The portion of the decision under review under the heading "Assessment of Risk" is relatively brief. It is reproduced in full here: 
 
 
 
 "I have read and considered the applicant's PRRA application, submissions and Reasons for Decision of the RPD. Risk by definition is forward-looking; as a result, I look to the most current, publicly available documentary evidence regarding country conditions and human rights in Jamaica in order to make a determination regarding risk. 
 
 
 
 "The applicant entered Canada and made a claim for refugee protection on 07 August 2007 at the Fort Erie, Ontario Port of Entry. 
 
 
 
 "The determinative issue for the panel was:  
 whether the harm allegedly feared by the claimant rises to the level that he would face a serious possibility of persecution, or whether he would instead be subject to discrimination 
 . It made the following factual determinations: 
 
 
 
 ' 
 Counsel submitted that Jamaica remains a society which is homophobic, a position which is somewhat supported by the documentary evidence before the Board and one that I do not disagree with. However, while I accept that the claimant has faced discrimination in Jamaica, the claimant has failed to place any persuasive evidence before the Board that he has suffered persecution. The claimant freely admitted, when asked by the Tribunal Officer, that he has never in his life been subjected personally to any level of violence, nor does he even know anyone personally in the homosexual community who has ever been subjected to violence. The claimant testified that on no occasion has he ever had to engage the protection of the state while living in Jamaica. The evidence before me does not suggest that he has experienced persecution in the past. I find that he has not demonstrated that he possesses a well-founded fear of persecution, nor is there any evidence that there is an agent of persecution waiting for him to return to Jamaica. 
 
 
 
 ' 
 The onus to establish a claim rests on the claimant. Although the claimant testified in a credible and forthright manner, and did not embellish his answers, I do not find that the claimant has established his claim 
 . 
 
 
 
 ' 
 In the specific circumstances of this claimant, I find that he did not suffer persecution. While I accept that he suffered discrimination in Jamaica, his experiences did not rise to the level of persecution. I find that what the claimant has experienced in the past, and what he fears upon return to Jamaica is not persecution, but rather discrimination. His fear of returning to Jamaica is now purely speculative as he has not been there in thirteen years 
 .' 
 
 
 
 "Accordingly, his claim for protection was rejected on 12 May 2009. Leave to seek judicial review of the negative RPD decision to the Federal Court of Canada was denied on 08 September 2009. 
 
 
 
 "The risk cited by the applicant in his PRRA application are essentially the same as those heard and considered by the RPD. The purpose of this assessment is not to reargue the facts that were before the panel. The decision of the RPD is to be considered as final with respect to the issue of protection under sections 96 and 97 of the  
 IRPA 
 , subject only to the possibility that new evidence shows that the applicant would be exposed to new, different or additional risk developments that could not have been contemplated at the time of the RPD decision. (Escalona Perez v. Canada, 2006) I do not find that the applicant's past treatment, in and of itself, warrants a granting of protection nor is it necessarily indicative of a forward-looking risk in light of the documentary evidence regarding country conditions and his personal circumstances. 
 
 
 
 "The applicant has submitted his affidavit, dated 18 August 2009. There is a written account of the events which caused him to leave Jamaica and eventually seek protection in Canada. While this document post-dates the RPD decision, it reiterates events that transpired prior to his departure from Jamaica. It does not add to the information concerning personal risk and does not enlighten as to new risk developments for the applicant in Jamaica; I afford this document little weight. 
 
 
 
 "An affidavit from Gareth Henry has been submitted in support of this application. This affidavit is undated; however, in fairness to the applicant, it has been considered in this assessment. The deponent states that he was the co-chair of the Jamaican Forum for Lesbians, All-Sexuals and Gays (J-Flag) from 2004 until January 2008. He states that he left Jamaica for Canada in January 2008, and was found to be a Convention refugee in July 2008. In his co-chair capacity, he submits that he:  
 was privy to information concerning attacks on gays in Jamaica and was constantly kept updated about conditions in Jamaica for the LGBT 
  (Lesbian, Gay, Bi-Sexual, Trans-Sexual)  
 community 
 . It is his opinion that an openly gay man such as the applicant would face considerable risk to his personal security and safety, and ultimately, to his life if he were to return to Jamaica. While this affidavit may post-date the decision of the RPD, the information contained within it pre-dates the decision and does not add to the information concerning personal risk, nor does it enlighten as to new risk developments for the applicant in Jamaica. I find the deponent's opinion to be speculative in nature and afford this document low probative value. 
 
 
 
 "Subsection 161(2) of the  
 IRPA 
   
 Regulations 
  requires that, ' 
 A person who makes written submissions must identify the evidence presented that meets the requirements of paragraph 113(a) of the Act and indicate how that evidence relates to them 
 .' I have read and considered the applicant's remaining submissions and it is determined that they describe the general country conditions in Jamaica, and he has not linked this evidence to his personalized risk. The applicant has not provided objective documentary evidence to support that his profile in Jamaica is similar to those persons that would currently be at risk of persecution or harm in that country. I find that the documents relate to conditions faced by the general population, or describe specific events or conditions faced by persons not similarly situated to the applicant. The applicant has not been in Jamaica since 1996. The evidence before me does not support that he is being sought by a person or persons in Jamaica. The applicant states that he is at risk in Jamaica due to his homosexuality. Evidence does not indicate that he is being targeted by any organization or person from Jamaica or that any of his family members in Jamaica are being targeted due to his sexual orientation. I find it objectively unreasonable that after approximately 13 years, the applicant is of interest to anyone in Jamaica as a result of his homosexuality. The evidence before me does not support that the applicant faces a personalized risk in Jamaica due to his homosexuality. 
 
 
 
 "I now turn to objective documentary evidence to determine whether there has been a material change in country conditions in Jamaica, since the panel's negative RPD decision in May 2009, which would now bring the applicant within the definition of a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection." (Italicized portions, as in the original)