[19]
The sterility of the provision appears to reside in its counter-productivity, quite apart from its irrelevant discrimination on personal characteristics in breach of s. 15(1) of the Charter. Andrews v. Law Society of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 143; 91 N.R. 255; 56 D.L.R.(4th) 1. Subparagraphs (i) and (ii) are surely counter-productive according to the author Thomas Gabor, an excerpt from whose eopus, The Prediction of Criminal Behaviour: Statistical Approaches, 1986 U. of T. Press, is appended as exhibit "H" to Janet Rowsell's affidavit, filed by the applicant. The following passages at pp. 36 and 37 of that work are, among others, pertinent:
"As in the two cohort studies just cited, an early age of delinquency onset was positively related to the total number of contacts with the criminal justice system. An interesting finding was that individuals with four or more contacts prior to the age of 18 had a better-than-even likelihood of exceeding that number of contacts following the age of 18, whereas, for those with three or less prior contacts, the situation was reversed - that is, less than half exceeded their pre-18 total following that age. What this seems to indicate is an intensification of criminality for those already criminally active as juveniles and a tapering off for those never deeply committed to criminality.
....
"Another way of examining the age factor is to observe parole outcome at various ages. In a study of 7,245 parolees released in 1968 across the United States, Babst, Koval, and Neithercutt (1972) found that the probability of parole success was almost invariant across different age  groups. This included comparisons between those aged 19 years and less with those over 40 years of age. However, when offenders were classified according to their prior criminal records and drug or alcohol involvement, those over 25 years of age consistently did better than those under that age. In a Canadian study of 423 Ontario parolees in 1968, Waller (1974), using the same cutting-off point of 25 years of age, found that the younger parolees were substantially higher recidivism risks than were those in the older categories."
Born in March, 1941, the applicant, along with others of his age presents less risk of further criminal behaviour, or of committing further offences than do male persons younger than 18 years of age. The age discrimination in s. 19(2)(a) appears unjust and unjustifiable.