 [13] 
  The onus resting on an applicant for registration of a trademark therefore is to establish that it has chosen a particular design as a distinguishing feature of its product and that its product has become known in, and acquired a reputation in, the minds of the consuming public by reason of that distinguishing feature. Unless an applicant is able to adduce evidence which demonstrates this fact, it is not entitled to registration of the mark in question. In  
 Oxford Pendaflex Canada Ltd. v. Korr Marketing Ltd. et al. 
 , [1982] 1 S.C.R. 494; 41 N.R. 553; 64 C.P.R.(2d) 1, Estey, J., made the following observations at p. 7: 
 
 
 
 "As to the immediate issue here, some guidance is to be found in the comment by Russell, L.J., in Roche Products Ltd. et al. v. Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd., [1973] R.P.C. 473, at p. 482: 
 
 
 
 'Now, in this as in all other passing off cases, the basic question is whether, directly or indirectly, the manner in which the goods of defendant are presented to the relevant consumers is such as to convey to the minds of the latter the impression that they are the goods of the plaintiff. In an "appearance" or get-up case it is not enough simply to say that the former are very like the latter.  
 It must be established that consumers have, by reason of the appearance of the goods of the plaintiff, come to regard them as having some one trade source or providence, whether manufacturing or marketing, though it matters not that they have no idea at all of the identity of that trade source or provenance. 
 ' 
 
 
 
 "It is to be noted that in the first part of the observation of Russell, L.J., there seems to be a requirement that the purchasing public be left with the impression that the goods of the defendant are the goods of the plaintiff. The next part of the paragraph makes it clear, however, that all that need be left in the mind of the purchaser is the idea that all of the pills (in that case), by reason of their shape, size and mode or marking, came from 'one trade source'." (emphasis added) 
