[8]
Here are some transcribed passages from the cross-examination of Mr. Dan, on May 25, 1994, in which counsel for the respondent evinces a testy paranoia in declining to permit his client to answer. They are drawn from exhibit A to Barbara Anne Gallagher's affidavit, filed:
"152. Q. Okay. Can you advise me where your source [of nizatidine] is located? Your supplier is located?
MR. PLUMLEY: No
BY MR. CREBER:
153. Q. Is it in Canada or outside Canada?
MR. PLUMLEY: We object.
BY MR. CREBER:
154. Q. Will you be importing your nizatidine or will it be manufactured in Canada?
MR. PLUMLEY: The materials that are manufactured in Canada will be manufactured in Canada. And the materials that are imported, will be imported. And further than that, we object.
MR. CREBER: Well, excuse me, sir, you are aware that there is an issue related to ss. 39.11 and 39.14. And a clearly relevant fact relating to those sections is whether the material will be imported or made in Canada.
THE DEPONENT: We have to abide by the regulations.
BY MR. CREBER:
155. Q. Well, I am entitled to know when the licence may or may not be effective.
MR. PLUMLEY: Well, you may think you are entitled to know this or that. I told you what our position is.
MR. CREBER: Mr. Plumley ...
MR. PLUMLEY: Don't give me that 'Mr. Plumley' with a mournful tone stuff. If you have a problem then you are going to have to deal with it in the proper forum. But don't keep attacking me personally.
(This is remarkable and patently paranoid.)
BY MR. CREBER:
156. Q. Do you agree, Mr. Dan, that you will not be permitted to import any nizatidine until 1997?
MR. PLUMLEY: I object. It is not for this witness to be giving evidence about that."
Strenuous as the objections by the respondent's counsel were in May, 1994, yet this fact sought to be elicited then, is at last admitted by the respondent's counsel in the above quoted passage from Part II LAW in counsel's motion factum.
"BY MR. CREBER:
157. Q. Okay. Do you plan to be importing any nizatidine prior to December 31, 1997?
MR. PLUMLEY: He told you what his position was earlier, and I told you I would go and check what our position was in the matter, and that is ... further than that, I object.
BY MR. CREBER:
158. Q. Is the nizatidine that is the subject matter of the Notice of Allegation, will it be made in Canada or will it be imported?
MR. PLUMLEY: I object.
BY MR. CREBER:
159. Q. Do you intend or do you wish to have a Notice of Compliance prior to December 31, 1997?
MR. PLUMLEY: I object, he already told you what his position was.
MR. CREBER: No, he hasn't.
MR. PLUMLEY: Well, you say he hasn't, I say he has. You might as well move on, because our answer is not going to change."
Relevance To Infringement Considered